35420295|a|This study followed up ADHD/autistic symptoms and attentional performance in children/adolescents with ASD and typically developing ones (TD) over 5-7 years. The participants were stratified by age at baseline into child (< 12 years) and adolescent (12-19 years) groups. ADHD symptoms, especially hyperactivity, and attentional functions significantly improved during follow-up, more in children than in adolescents, in both ASD and TD. Significantly more omission errors and perseverations were noted in ASD than TD through the follow-up. Children with ASD had more improvement in reaction time while adolescents with ASD had less improvement in commission errors and detectability than TD. No correlation of attentional functions and ADHD symptoms in ASD implied different neural mechanisms of ADHD symptoms between ASD and ADHD.
35420044|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Children with autism spectrum disorder attending special education preschool classrooms may not receive support that addresses their core challenges, such as engagement and social communication. There are interventions designed to target these core challenges, like the play-based intervention known as Joint Attention, Symbolic Play, Engagement, and Regulation. Embedding strategies from an intervention like Joint Attention, Symbolic Play, Engagement, and Regulation into more traditional academic activities can help teachers target engagement and social communication throughout the school day. In the current study, we collaborated with special education preschool teachers to embed Joint Attention, Symbolic Play, Engagement, and Regulation strategies during small group time for moderate to severe disability students with autism spectrum disorder, 3-5 years of age. Compared to teachers implementing the standard preschool curriculum, teachers trained in Joint Attention, Symbolic Play, Engagement, and Regulation strategies effectively embedded these strategies in their small group activities, and their students were more likely to engage with peers during these activities. Supporting teachers to embed targeted strategies in academic activities can help them provide students more opportunities to engage with peers during the school day. Teachers can support their autistic students to interact appropriately with their peers. Unlike interventions that train peers to act as a teacher, embedding Joint Attention, Symbolic Play, Engagement, and Regulation strategies during small group academic activities facilitates naturalistic social interactions for autistic students.
35419502|a|Objective: This study has the purpose of developing an epidemiological profile of children with neurodevelopmental disorders in southern Puerto Rico. Methods: This is an exploratory study with a mixed design that was carried out in a diagnostic center located in Ponce, Puerto Rico. The population under study were children within 0-18-years-old of both sexes diagnosed with a neurodevelopmental disorder using the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM-4) and DSM-5 criteria. The sample under investigation were all the children in the secondary database of children who received health services in the diagnostic center during 2016-2017. Additionally, to the data from the secondary database, a hand-writing record review was performed to obtain data related to comorbidities and family history. The bivariate and multivariate analysis evaluated the association between each neurodevelopmental disorder, and each disease reported in the family history of diseases. Also bivariate, and multivariate analysis assessed the association between each neurodevelopmental disorder, and each comorbidity reported. Results and Conclusion: The mean age and standard deviation of the sample were 5.2+-3.20, and 80.5% were males. Most of the children lived in Ponce, Puerto Rico. The sample size did not have normal distribution because the sample size was too small and selected by non-probabilistic methods. Furthermore, 88.2% of the children received a previous evaluation related to the problem, and 70.5% received treatment for the symptoms. The results revealed that neurodevelopmental disorders frequently co-occurred. Also, other comorbidities commonly co-occurred with these disorders. Mental disorders were commonly reported with autism, attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and communication disorders. Autism was also linked to a family history of mental disorders.
35419082|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder associated with brain development that subsequently affects the physical appearance of the face. Autistic children have different patterns of facial features, which set them distinctively apart from typically developed (TD) children. This study is aimed at helping families and psychiatrists diagnose autism using an easy technique, viz., a deep learning-based web application for detecting autism based on experimentally tested facial features using a convolutional neural network with transfer learning and a flask framework. MobileNet, Xception, and InceptionV3 were the pretrained models used for classification. The facial images were taken from a publicly available dataset on Kaggle, which consists of 3,014 facial images of a heterogeneous group of children, i.e., 1,507 autistic children and 1,507 nonautistic children. Given the accuracy of the classification results for the validation data, MobileNet reached 95% accuracy, Xception achieved 94%, and InceptionV3 attained 0.89%.
35418825|a|Bi-allelic mutations in the TUBGCP4 gene have been recently associated with autosomal recessive microcephaly with chorioretinopathy. However, little is known about the genotype-phenotype characteristics of this disorder. Here, we describe a 5-year-old male patient with autism and a normal occipitofrontal circumference. No retinal abnormalities were observed. Brain MRI revealed the presence of enlarged sheaths of both tortuous optic nerves; both eyes had shorter axial lengths. Whole-exome sequencing in trio revealed synonymous TUBGCP4 variants in homozygous state: c.1746G>T; p.Leu582=. This synonymous variant has been previously described and probably leads to skipping of exon 16 of TUBGCP4. These results broaden the clinical spectrum of this new syndrome and suggest that TUBGCP4 bi-allelic mutations may underlie complex neurodevelopmental disorders.
35418824|a|Despite the increased use of array comparative genomic hybridisation, duplications of Xq remain rarely reported in the literature. Xq21.1q21.31 duplication has previously been reported only once in a boy with features of Prader Willi syndrome (PWS). We report 2 malesiblings with maternally inherited duplication of Xq21.1q21.31 who demonstrate a variable phenotype. The proband has Prader Willi-like features such as global developmental delay, autism, obesity, short hands, and small genitalia with a history of food seeking behaviour, while his younger brother has isolated speech delay with some autistic features under evaluation. Both siblings have features such as bitemporal narrowing and small hands. It is therefore likely that the phenotype of duplications in this region is broader than PWS phenocopy, and further cases would be required to elucidate this.
35418801|a|Objectives: Restricted and repetitive behaviors (RRBs) are a core symptom in the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The complexity of behavioral patterns has called for the creation of phenotypically homogeneous subgroups among individuals with ASD. The purpose of this study was 1) to investigate the different types of RRBs and 2) to explore whether subgroups created by RRBs would show unique levels of functioning in toddlers and young children with ASD. Methods: A total of 313 children with ASD, aged 12-42 months were included in the analysis. The Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised was used to obtain information on the different types of RRBs by grouping 15 items into six categories. The Vineland Adaptive Behaviors Scale, a parent-reported questionnaire, was used to measure adaptive functioning. A portion of the children were analyzed separately for verbal-related RRBs based on their expressive language level. Two-step cluster analysis using RRB groups as features was used to create subgroups. Analysis of covariance while covarying for age and language was performed to explore the clinical characteristics of each cluster group. Results: Sensory-related RRBs were the most prevalent, followed by circumscribed interests, interest in objects, resistance to change, and repetitive body movements. A subset of the children was analyzed separately to explore verbal-related RRBs. Four cluster groups were created based on reported RRBs, with multiple RRBs demonstrating significant delays in adaptive functioning. Conclusion: Heterogeneity of RRBs emerges at a young age. The different patterns of RRBs can be used as valuable information to determine developmental trajectories with better implications for treatment approaches.
35418797|a|The Guarantee of Rights and Support for Persons with Developmental Disabilities Act was enacted and revised in 2014. However, national measures for persons with developmental disabilities remain insufficient. In the film, "Grown Up," director Hyeyoung Jang filmed the daily life of her sister, who has developmental disabilities. She raised not only the issue of institutionalization in people with developmental disabilities in Korea but also the issue of a lack of policies that would be essential to them and their family members. In the future, I hope that as experts, child and adolescent psychiatrists in Korea will pay more attention to the lives of people with developmental disabilities outside the clinic and propose policies to help them and their family members.
35418620|a|Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are neurodevelopmental disorders whose diagnosis relies on deficient social interaction and communication together with repetitive behavior. To date, no pharmacological treatment has been approved that ameliorates social behavior in patients with ASD. Based on the excitation/inhibition imbalance theory of autism, we hypothesized that bromide ions, long used as an antiepileptic medication, could relieve core symptoms of ASD. We evaluated the effects of chronic sodium bromide (NaBr) administration on autistic-like symptoms in three genetic mouse models of autism: Oprm1-/-, Fmr1-/- and Shank3Deltaex13-16-/- mice. We showed that chronic NaBr treatment relieved autistic-like behaviors in these three models. In Oprm1-/- mice, these beneficial effects were superior to those of chronic bumetanide administration. At transcriptional level, chronic NaBr in Oprm1 null mice was associated with increased expression of genes coding for chloride ions transporters, GABAA receptor subunits, oxytocin and mGlu4 receptor. Lastly, we uncovered synergistic alleviating effects of chronic NaBr and a positive allosteric modulator (PAM) of mGlu4 receptor on autistic-like behavior in Oprm1-/- mice. We evidenced in heterologous cells that bromide ions behave as PAMs of mGlu4, providing a molecular mechanism for such synergy. Our data reveal the therapeutic potential of bromide ions, alone or in combination with a PAM of mGlu4 receptor, for the treatment of ASDs.
35418514|a|To date, there has been little research considering both autism spectrum disorder (ASD) symptom severity and motor impairment simultaneously when investigating their associations with obesity. This study was designed to identify the moderating role of symptom severity in the relationship between motor competence and overweight/obesity for children with ASD. Seventy-eight children with a clinical diagnosis were recruited from a large autism rehabilitation center in Wuhan, China. Chi-square, partial correlation, and moderation regression analyses revealed that the prevalence of overweight and obesity was similar regardless of symptom severity. Balance was the only motor skill that correlated with body mass index. Furthermore, symptom severity significantly moderated the correlation. Children with low autism severity might be more likely to demonstrate the relationship between balance and body mass index than those with high autism severity. Combating obesity by enhancing motor competence should cautiously consider personal and environment factors such as individual severity of ASD.
35418420|a|OBJECTIVE: Previous work has raised questions about the role of general practitioners (GPs) in the identification of neurodevelopmental conditions such as autism spectrum disorders (autism) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorders (ADHD). This study aimed to explore how GPs identify these conditions in practice and their perspectives on recent changes to local referral pathways that mean referrals to the neurodevelopmental team come through educational professionals and health visitors, rather than GPs. This study also aimed to explore Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS) specialist's perspectives on the role of GPs. SETTING: GP practices, local neurodevelopmental services and specialist CAMHS services in the UK. PARTICIPANTS: semistructured interviews were conducted with GPs (n=8), specialists in local CAMHS (n=7), and professionals at national CAMHS services around the country (n=10). Interviews were conducted between January and May 2019. A framework approach informed by thematic analysis was used to analyse the data. RESULTS: GPs drew on various forms of tacit and explicit information including behavioural markers, parental report, prior knowledge of the family, expert and lay resources. Opinions varied between GPs regarding changes to the referral pathway, with some accepting the changes and others describing it as a 'disaster'. CAMHS specialists tended to feel that GPs required more neurodevelopmental training and time to conduct consultations. CONCLUSION: This study adds to the literature showing that GPs use an array of information sources when making referral decisions for autism and ADHD. Further work is urgently required to evaluate the impact of reconfiguring neurodevelopmental referral pathways such that GPs have a diminished role in identification.
35418418|a|OBJECTIVE: To examine if mortality rates are lower in people with intellectual disability who have had a health check compared with those who have not had health checks. SETTING: General practice records of 26 954 people with an intellectual disability in Wales between 2005-2017, of which 7650 (28.4%) with a health check were matched 1:2 with those without a health check. PRIMARY OUTCOME MEASURE: Office of National Statistics mortality data; a Cox regression was utilised to examine time to death adjusted for comorbidities and gender. RESULTS: Patients who had a health check were stratified by those who (1) had a confirmed health check, that is, Read Code for a health check (n=7650 (28.4 %)) and (2) had no evidence of receiving a health check in their medical record. Patients with a health check were matched for age at time of health check with two people who did not have a health check. The health check was associated with improved survival for those with autism or Down's Syndrome (HR 0.58 (95% CI 0.37 to 0.91) and HR 0.76 (95% CI 0.64 to 0.91), respectively). There was no evidence of improved survival for those diagnosed with diabetes or cancer. The people who had a health check were more likely to be older, have epilepsy and less likely to have autism or Down's syndrome. CONCLUSIONS: Health checks are likely to influence survival if started before a person is diagnosed with a chronic condition, especially for people with autism or Down's syndrome.
35417922|a|Genetic variants in SCN2A, encoding the NaV1.2 voltage-gated sodium channel, are associated with a range of neurodevelopmental disorders with overlapping phenotypes. Some variants fit into a framework wherein gain-of-function missense variants that increase neuronal excitability lead to developmental and epileptic encephalopathy, while loss-of-function variants that reduce neuronal excitability lead to intellectual disability and/or autism spectrum disorder with or without co-morbid seizures. One unique case less easily classified using this framework is the de novo missense variant SCN2A-p.K1422E, associated with infant-onset developmental delay, infantile spasms, and features of autism spectrum disorder. Prior structure-function studies demonstrated that K1422E substitution alters ion selectivity of NaV1.2, conferring Ca2+ permeability, lowering overall conductance, and conferring resistance to tetrodotoxin (TTX). Based on heterologous expression of K1422E, we developed a compartmental neuron model incorporating variant channels that predicted reductions in peak action potential speed. We generated Scn2aK1422E mice and characterized effects on neurons and neurological/neurobehavioral phenotypes. Cultured cortical neurons from heterozygous Scn2aK1422E/+ mice exhibited lower current density with a TTX-resistant component and reversal potential consistent with mixed ion permeation. Recordings from Scn2aK1442E/+ cortical slices demonstrated impaired action potential initiation and larger Ca2+ transients at the axon initial segment during the rising phase of the action potential, suggesting complex effects on channel function. Scn2aK1422E/+ mice exhibited rare spontaneous seizures, interictal EEG abnormalities, altered induced seizure thresholds, reduced anxiety-like behavior and alterations in olfactory-guided social behavior. Overall, Scn2aK1422E/+ mice present with phenotypes similar yet distinct from other Scn2a models, consistent with complex effects of K1422E on NaV1.2 channel function.
35417751|a|BACKGROUND: Motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease (PD) are apparent after a high proportion of dopamine neurons in the substantia nigra have degenerated. The vast majority of PD cases are sporadic, and the underlying pathobiological causes are poorly understood. Adults exhibit great variability in the numbers of nigral dopamine neurons, suggesting that factors during embryonic or early life regulate the development and physiology of dopaminergic neurons. Furthermore, exposure to infections and inflammation in utero has been shown to affect fetal brain development in models of schizophrenia and autism. Here, we utilize a mouse maternal infection model to examine how maternal herpesvirus infection impacts dopaminergic neuron-related gene and protein expression in the adult offspring. METHODS: Pregnant mice were injected with murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV), murine gamma herpes virus-68 (MHV68) or phosphate buffered saline (PBS) at embryonic day 8.5. Offspring were sacrificed at eight weeks of age and midbrains were processed for whole genome RNA sequencing, DNA methylation analysis, targeted protein expression and high-performance liquid chromatography for quantification of dopamine and its metabolites. RESULTS: The midbrain of adult offspring from MHV68 infected dams had significantly decreased expression of genes linked to dopamine neurons (Th, Lmx1b, and Foxa1) and increased Lrrk2, a gene involved in familial PD and PD risk that associates with neuroinflammation. Deconvolution analysis revealed that the proportion of dopamine neuron genes in the midbrain was reduced. There was an overall increase in DNA methylation in the midbrain of animals from MHV68-infected dams and pathway analyses indicated mitochondrial dysfunction, with reductions in genes associated with ATP synthesis, mitochondrial respiratory chain, and mitochondrial translation in the offspring of dams infected with MHV68. TIGAR (a negative regulator of mitophagy) and SDHA (mitochondrial complex II subunit) protein levels were increased, and the levels of 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) in the striatum were increased in these offspring compared to offspring from uninfected control dams. No such changes were observed in the offspring of dams infected with MCMV. CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that maternal infection with Herpesviridae, specifically MHV68, can trigger changes in the development of the midbrain that impact dopamine neuron physiology in adulthood. Our work is of importance for the understanding of neuronal susceptibility underlying neurodegenerative disease, with particular relevance for PD.
35417594|a|The text discusses the growing incidence of autism in the world, presents an understanding of autism from the point of view of analytical psychology, and reflects on the treatment of autistic patients. Today, it is understood that autism is part of a continuum of characteristics on a spectrum with biological and congenital causes. It is a non-specific picture resulting from multiple causations of non-linear factors. Autism is a neuro-developmental disorder characterized by a triad of symptoms: persistent deficits in social communication and social interaction, and restricted and repetitive patterns of behaviours, interests, or activities. Autism spectrum disorder must be considered as a clinical entity, with current clearly defined characteristics. It is an extremely complex condition, which requires multidisciplinary approaches aiming at the possibility of prognosis and effective therapeutic approaches. This paper explores how a disturbance may occur from the intra-uterine phase, in which matriarchal experiences do not constellate. The structuring function of the patriarchal organization can then become dominant, and people with autism need understanding and help to organize their world and learn to live in it. As they don't have the capacity to structure consciousness through the matriarchal archetype, they rely entirely on the structuring and organizing capacity of the Father archetype.
35417307|a|Significant disparities exist in early identification of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) for Hispanic and Latinx children. ASD prevalence estimates are approximately identical for White and Black children but lower for Hispanic and Latinx children. Reasons for these racial and ethnic variations are likely multifactorial. This review sought to understand previously described barriers and limitations to accessing ASD diagnostic services in the Latinx and Hispanic communities. Three main categories of existing barriers were identified: (1) parent/family, (2) community, and (3) systemic. These barriers are complex and multifactorial in nature, including circumstantial limitations such as limited English proficiency, noncitizenship, and low-income status. These can limit health care access, and can lead to family and community cultural barriers, poor knowledge about ASD, and social stigma related to disabilities. Understanding and mitigating barriers is essential to reduce disparities to ASD diagnosis in the Hispanic and Latinx community. [Pediatr Ann. 2022;51(4):e167-e171.].
35416566|a|To understand how children and young people with tic disorders were affected by COVID-19, we compared pre and during pandemic scores on the Yale Global Tic Severity Scale (YGTSS). Participants were young people (N = 112; male:78%; 9-17 years) randomised to the control arm of the "ORBIT-Trial" (ISRCTN70758207, ClinicalTrials.gov-NCT03483493). For this analysis, the control arm was split into two groups: one group was followed up to 12-months' post-randomisation before the pandemic started (pre-COVID group, n = 44); the other group was impacted by the pandemic at the 12-month follow-up (during-COVID group, n = 47). Mixed effects linear regression modelling was conducted to explore differences in YGTSS at 6- and 12-months post-randomisation. There were no significant differences in tic symptom or severity between participants who were assessed before and during COVID-19. This finding was not influenced by age, gender, symptoms of anxiety or autism spectrum disorder. Thus, the COVID-19 pandemic did not significantly impact existing tic symptoms.
35416430|a|Early qualitative research indicates that autistic burnout is commonly experienced by autistic people and is associated with significant, negative consequences for their mental health, wellbeing, and quality of life, including suicidality. Findings to date suggest that factors associated with being autistic and the widespread lack of autism awareness and acceptance within society contribute to the onset and recurrence of autistic burnout. Based on autistic adults' descriptions of their lived experiences, a Conceptual Model of Autistic Burnout (CMAB) is proposed, which describes a series of hypothesized relationships between identified risk and protective factors that may contribute to, or buffer against, autistic burnout. The theoretical framework for the CMAB is based on the Social-Relational model of disability and neurodiversity paradigm, and the Job Demands-Resources model of burnout, and Conservation of Resources theory. The CMAB offers a holistic perspective for understanding individual, social, and environmental factors that can influence autistic burnout via various direct and indirect pathways. Autistic burnout research is in its infancy and the CMAB provides a foundation for future investigations about this condition. LAY SUMMARY: Although many autistic people describe experiencing autistic burnout, there has been little research on this topic. Based on descriptions of autistic peoples' lived experiences, we developed a conceptual model to explore how various risk and protective factors may interact to contribute to, or prevent, autistic burnout.
35416175|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disease characterized by emotional and social deficits, which can be associated with sympathetic dysregulation. Thus, we aimed to analyze the electrodermal activity (EDA) using time, and novel spectral and nonlinear indices in ASD. The cohort consisted of 45 ASD boys and 45 age-matched controls. EDA was continuously recorded at rest. The EDA indices were evaluated by time-, spectral-, and nonlinear-domain analysis. Our results revealed increased non-specific skin conductance responses, spectral parameters in high and very-high frequency bands, approximate and symbolic information entropy indicating sympathetic overactivity in ASD vs. controls (p < 0.05, for all). Surprisingly, the nonlinear index from detrended fluctuation analysis alpha1 was lower in ASD vs. controls (p = 0.024) providing thus distinct information about qualitative features of complex sympathetic regulation. Concluding, the complex time, spectral, and nonlinear EDA indices revealed discrete abnormalities in sympathetic cholinergic regulation as one of the potential pathomechanisms contributing to cardiovascular complications in ASD.
35416070|a|
35415827|a|Atypical visual attention is a hallmark of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Identifying the attention features accurately discerning between people with ASD and typically developing (TD) at the individual level remains a challenge. In this study, we developed a new systematic framework combining high accuracy deep learning classification, deep learning segmentation, image ablation and a direct measurement of classification ability to identify the discriminative features for autism identification. Our two-stream model achieved the state-of-the-art performance with a classification accuracy of 0.95. Using this framework, two new categories of features, Food & drink and Outdoor-objects, were identified as discriminative attention features, in addition to the previously reported features including Center-object and Human-faces, etc. Altered attention to the new categories helps to understand related atypical behaviors in ASD. Importantly, the area under curve (AUC) based on the combined top-9 features identified in this study was 0.92, allowing an accurate classification at the individual level. We also obtained a small but informative dataset of 12 images with an AUC of 0.86, suggesting a potentially efficient approach for the clinical diagnosis of ASD. Together, our deep learning framework based on VGG-16 provides a novel and powerful tool to recognize and understand abnormal visual attention in ASD, which will, in turn, facilitate the identification of biomarkers for ASD.
35415776|a|We investigated ASD-diagnosed adults' and neurotypical (NT) controls' processing of emoji and emoji influence on the emotionality of otherwise-neutral sentences. Study 1 participants categorised emoji representing the six basic emotions using a fixed-set of emotional adjectives. Results showed that ASD-diagnosed participants' classifications of fearful, sad, and surprised emoji were more diverse and less 'typical' than NT controls' responses. Study 2 participants read emotionally-neutral sentences; half paired with sentence-final happy emoji, half with sad emoji. Participants rated sentence + emoji stimuli for emotional valence. ASD-diagnosed and NT participants rated sentences + happy emoji as equally-positive, however, ASD-diagnosed participants rated sentences + sad emoji as more-negative than NT participants. We must acknowledge differential perceptions and effects of emoji, and emoji-text inter-relationships, when working with neurodiverse stakeholders.
35415471|a|Purpose: Pediatric fingertip injuries are most commonly reported in the setting of an accidental occurrence. The purpose of this study was to determine whether there is an association of child abuse and neglect with pediatric fingertip injuries. Methods: The New York Statewide Planning and Research Cooperative System (2004 to 2013) administrative database was used to identify children aged 0 to 12 years who presented in the inpatient or outpatient (emergency department or ambulatory surgery) setting. International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision diagnosis codes were used to identify fingertip injuries (amputation, avulsion, or crushed finger) and abuse. Cohort demographics of children presenting with fingertip injuries were described. We analyzed the association between fingertip injuries and child abuse using multivariable logistic regression, with variables for insurance status, race, ethnicity, sex, and behavioral risks including depression, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, aggressive behavior, and autism. Results: Of the 4,870,299 children aged 0 to 12 years in the cohort, 79,108 patients (1.62%) during the study period (2004 to 2013) presented with fingertip injuries. Of those with a fingertip injury, 0.27% (n = 216) presented either at that visit or in other visits with a code for child abuse, compared with 0.22% of pediatric patients without a fingertip injury (n = 10,483). In an adjusted analysis, the odds of a fingertip injury were 23% higher (odds ratio [OR] = 1.23; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.07-1.41) for children who had been abused, compared with those who had not. Patients were more likely to present with fingertip injuries if they had ever had Medicaid insurance (OR = 1.40; 95% CI, 1.37-1.42) or had a behavioral risk factor (OR = 1.35; 95% CI, 1.30-1.40). Conclusions: Patients presenting with abuse are significantly more likely to have fingertip injuries during childhood compared with those without recorded abuse, which suggests that these injuries may be ones of abuse or neglect. Medicaid insurance, white race, and behavioral diagnoses of depression, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, aggressive behavior, and autism were also associated with increased odds of presenting with fingertip injuries. Type of study/level of evidence: Prognostic III.
35415454|a|Attention recognition plays a vital role in providing learning support for children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). The unobtrusiveness of face-tracking techniques makes it possible to build automatic systems to detect and classify attentional behaviors. However, constructing such systems is a challenging task due to the complexity of attentional behavior in ASD. This paper proposes a face-based attention recognition model using two methods. The first is based on geometric feature transformation using a support vector machine (SVM) classifier, and the second is based on the transformation of time-domain spatial features to 2D spatial images using a convolutional neural network (CNN) approach. We conducted an experimental study on different attentional tasks for 46 children (ASD n=20, typically developing children n=26) and explored the limits of the face-based attention recognition model for participant and task differences. Our results show that the geometric feature transformation using an SVM classifier outperforms the CNN approach. Also, attention detection is more generalizable within typically developing children than within ASD groups and within low-attention tasks than within high-attention tasks. This paper highlights the basis for future face-based attentional recognition for real-time learning and clinical attention interventions. Supplementary Information: The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s41666-021-00101-y.
35414064|a|Many studies report atypical responses to sensory information in autistic individuals, yet it is not clear which stages of processing are affected, with little consideration given to decision-making processes. We combined diffusion modelling with high-density EEG to identify which processing stages differ between 50 autistic and 50 typically developing children aged 6-14 years during two visual motion tasks. Our pre-registered hypotheses were that autistic children would show task-dependent differences in sensory evidence accumulation, alongside a more cautious decision-making style and longer non-decision time across tasks. We tested these hypotheses using hierarchical Bayesian diffusion models with a rigorous blind modelling approach, finding no conclusive evidence for our hypotheses. Using a data-driven method, we identified a response-locked centro-parietal component previously linked to the decision-making process. The build-up in this component did not consistently relate to evidence accumulation in autistic children. This suggests that the relationship between the EEG measure and diffusion-modelling is not straightforward in autistic children. Compared to a related study of children with dyslexia, motion processing differences appear less pronounced in autistic children. Exploratory analyses also suggest weak evidence that ADHD symptoms moderate perceptual decision-making in autistic children.
35413445|a|MRI has been extensively used to identify anatomical and functional differences in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Yet, many of these findings have proven difficult to replicate because studies rely on small cohorts and are built on many complex, undisclosed, analytic choices. We conducted an international challenge to predict ASD diagnosis from MRI data, where we provided preprocessed anatomical and functional MRI data from > 2,000 individuals. Evaluation of the predictions was rigorously blinded. 146 challengers submitted prediction algorithms, which were evaluated at the end of the challenge using unseen data and an additional acquisition site. On the best algorithms, we studied the importance of MRI modalities, brain regions, and sample size. We found evidence that MRI could predict ASD diagnosis: the 10 best algorithms reliably predicted diagnosis with AUC~0.80 - far superior to what can be currently obtained using genotyping data in cohorts 20-times larger. We observed that functional MRI was more important for prediction than anatomical MRI, and that increasing sample size steadily increased prediction accuracy, providing an efficient strategy to improve biomarkers. We also observed that despite a strong incentive to generalise to unseen data, model development on a given dataset faces the risk of overfitting: performing well in cross-validation on the data at hand, but not generalising. Finally, we were able to predict ASD diagnosis on an external sample added after the end of the challenge (EU-AIMS), although with a lower prediction accuracy (AUC=0.72). This indicates that despite being based on a large multisite cohort, our challenge still produced biomarkers fragile in the face of dataset shifts.
35412920|a|The corpus callosum (CC) is involved in several cognitive processes and the interhemispheric transfer of information. The current case study investigated neurocognitive and emotional processes in a 7-year-old female with partial agenesis of the corpus callosum, with an absent splenium and posterior body, with comorbid autism and ADHD. We measured cognitive functions, such as response inhibition, error monitoring, attentional disengagement, and attention capture by irrelevant emotional stimuli. We found that response inhibition was intact in the case. When happy faces were used as stop-signals, it interfered with response inhibition compared to angry-face-stop-signals. Similarly, happy faces (relative to angry faces) interfered with error monitoring; irrelevant angry faces captured attention more than happy faces. Attentional disengagement functions were impaired in the case compared to healthy controls. The findings give an insight into the interaction between cognition and emotion in pediatric partial agenesis of the CC, and have important clinical and theoretical implications.
35412693|a|Sleep disorders are one of the most prevalent psychiatric diseases. Insomnia is the most common sleep disorder amongst the general population. It is also one of the most frequent complaints in primary healthcare centers. Lavender is called "the broom of the brain" in different oriental traditional medicines. It is one of the most used plants for patients with sleep disorders. This study reviews what is currently known about the use of lavender for sleep disorders in patients with different diseases, from cancers and end-stage renal disease to neurological-psychiatric diseases (e.g., depression, dementia, and autism), respiratory, cardiac, and metabolic diseases. Additionally, its most used administration route is the inhalation of its essential oil (i.e., aromatherapy) alone or in combination by massage. Some limitations of the reviewed literature were discussed briefly. Overall, this critical review provides promising evidence of the lavender efficacy for sleep disorders in a wide variety of populations and diseases. However, further clinical studies with robust design and longer durations of intervention are necessary for more evidence-based judgment on its effect on sleep problems and to investigate its mechanism of action.
35412212|a|Although there is an urgent need to develop trauma-informed services for autistic youth, little research has evaluated adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) in autistic youth from an intergenerational perspective. 242 caregivers of autistic (n = 117) and non-autistic (n = 125) youth reported on ACEs that they experienced in their own childhoods and ACEs experienced by their children, as well as measures of depression, stress, and child autistic traits and behavioral concerns. Autistic youth and their caregivers both experienced significantly higher rates of ACEs than the non-autistic dyads. Intergenerational continuity, the association between caregiver and child ACEs, was significantly stronger for autistic youth. ACEs showed differential patterns of associations with parent depressive symptoms and child autistic traits across groups.
35412111|a|The pathophysiology of autistic spectrum disorder (ASD) is not fully understood and there are no diagnostic or predictive biomarkers. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are cell-derived nano-sized vesicles, carrying nucleic acids, proteins, lipids, and other bioactive substances. As reported, serum neural cell adhesion molecule L1 (L1CAM)-captured EVs (LCEVs) can provide reliable biomarkers for neurological diseases; however, little is known about the LCEVs in children with ASD. The study enrolled 100 children with ASD (2.5-6 years of age; 90 males) and 60 age-matched TD children (54 males) as control. The serum sample was collected and pooled into five ASD subgroups and three TD subgroups (n = 20). LCEVs were isolated and characterized meticulously. Whole-transcriptome of LCEVs was analyzed by lncRNA microarray and RNA-sequencing. All raw data was submitted on GEO Profiles, and GEO accession numbers is GSE186493. RNAs expressed differently in LCEVs from ASD sera vs. TD sera were screened, analyzed, and further validated. A total of 1418 mRNAs, 1745 lncRNAs, and 11 miRNAs were differentially expressed, and most of them were downregulated in ASD. Most RNAs were involved in neuron- and glycan-related networks implicated in ASD. The levels of EDNRA, SLC17A6, HTR3A, OSTC, TMEM165, PC-5p-139289_26, and hsa-miR-193a-5p were validated in at least 15 ASD and 15 TD individual serum samples, which were consistent with the results of transcriptome analysis. In conclusion, whole-transcriptome analysis of serum LCEVs reveals neural and glycosylation changes in ASD, which may help detect predictive biomarkers and molecular mechanisms of ASD, and provide reference for diagnoses and therapeutic management of the disease.
35411810|a|LAY ABSTRACT: What is already known about the topic?Mothers are encouraged to breastfeed their babies due to known health benefits for both babies and mothers. However, although breastfeeding is 'natural', that does not make it easy and many women experience challenges. Autistic women may face additional barriers to breastfeeding when compared to neurotypical women.What this paper adds?We reviewed all existing evidence on Autistic mothers' infant feeding experiences (22 pieces) and found that although many Autistic women wanted to breastfeed, breastfeeding was difficult for Autistic mothers for three key reasons. First, maternity and infant feeding services were inaccessible and unsupportive to Autistic mothers, meaning they did not receive help when needed. Second, becoming a mother was challenging because of exhaustion, loss of control over routines and a lack of social support. Third, when breastfeeding Autistic mothers experienced sensory challenges, such as 'being touched out', and pain, which could feel unbearable. Despite these difficulties, many Autistic mothers had done a lot of reading about breastfeeding and were determined to breastfeed their babies; some mothers found breastfeeding positive. Infant formula was often viewed as second-best compared to breastmilk, but some mothers found the ritual of preparing bottles of formula to be calming.Implications for practice, research or policyThe findings of this work show that Autistic mothers urgently need better support from health professionals to help meet their breastfeeding goals, including how to remove or reduce the extra barriers being Autistic brings to breastfeeding.
35411642|a|Significant comorbidity has been demonstrated between feeding and eating disorders and autism. Atypical interoception (perception of bodily signals) may, at least in part, be responsible for this association, as it has been implicated in the aetiology of both conditions. However, significant methodological limitations are impeding progress in this area. This paper provides a brief overview of how interoception has been linked to autism and feeding and eating disorders in both adolescent and adult populations before identifying several issues with current measures of interoception. We suggest that methodological issues may be contributing to the inconsistency in the empirical literature, and provide suggestions for future research.
35411575|a|OBJECTIVE: Executive functions (EFs) inefficiencies in anorexia nervosa (AN), especially in set-shifting and central coherence, suggest a link between AN and autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). This study aimed at comparing EF profiles in AN and ASD, and investigating clinical variables associated with the identified EF difficulties. METHOD: One hundred and sixty-two adolescents with AN or ASD completed self-report questionnaires assessing depression, anxiety and autism symptoms. Parents completed the behaviour rating of executive functions parent-form (BRIEF-P). Besides comparing EFs in AN and ASD, we also analysed clinical variables scoring below and above the mean age score across the all sample. We additionally examined the relationship between clinical variables and the BRIEF-P indexes in AN. RESULTS: Participants with ASD had greater EF difficulties than participants with AN on all BRIEF-P scales. In the whole sample, higher autistic features were related to poorer EF. In AN, lower body mass index and particularly higher autism-spectrum quotient (BRI: Beta = 0.55; p < 0.001 and GEC: Beta = 0.50; p < 0.001) were most strongly associated with poorer EF. CONCLUSION: Although participants with ASD showed greater difficulties, autistic traits were related to alter EFs in AN. Exploring further this dimension can undeniably allow better adaptive cognitive remediation programs.
35411384|a|
35411059|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) diagnosis is still based on behavioral criteria through a lengthy and time-consuming process. Much effort is being made to identify brain imaging biomarkers and develop tools that could facilitate its diagnosis. In particular, using Machine Learning classifiers based on resting-state fMRI (rs-fMRI) data is promising, but there is an ongoing need for further research on their accuracy and reliability. Therefore, we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to summarize the available evidence in the literature so far. A bivariate random-effects meta-analytic model was implemented to investigate the sensitivity and specificity across the 55 studies that offered sufficient information for quantitative analysis. Our results indicated overall summary sensitivity and specificity estimates of 73.8% and 74.8%, respectively. SVM stood out as the most used classifier, presenting summary estimates above 76%. Studies with bigger samples tended to obtain worse accuracies, except in the subgroup analysis for ANN classifiers. The use of other brain imaging or phenotypic data to complement rs-fMRI information seems promising, achieving higher sensitivities when compared to rs-fMRI data alone (84.7% versus 72.8%). Finally, our analysis showed AUC values between acceptable and excellent. Still, given the many limitations indicated in our study, further well-designed studies are warranted to extend the potential use of those classification algorithms to clinical settings.
35410870|a|Temporal processing of complex sounds is a fundamental and complex task in hearing and a prerequisite for processing and understanding vocalization, speech, and prosody. Here we studied response properties of neurons in the inferior colliculus (IC) in mice lacking Cacna2d3, a risk gene for autism spectrum disorders. The alpha2delta3 auxiliary Ca2+ channel subunit encoded by Cacna2d3 is essential for proper function of glutamatergic synapses in the auditory brainstem. Recent evidence has shown that much of auditory feature extraction is performed in the auditory brainstem and IC, including processing of amplitude modulation (AM). We determined both spectral and temporal properties of single- and multi-unit responses in the IC of anesthetized mice. IC units of alpha2delta3-/- mice showed normal tuning properties yet increased spontaneous rates compared with alpha2delta3+/+ When stimulated with AM tones, alpha2delta3-/- units exhibited less precise temporal coding and reduced evoked rates to higher modulation frequencies (fm). Whereas first spike latencies (FSL) were increased for only few modulation frequencies, population peak latencies were increased for fm ranging from 20 Hz to 100 Hz in alpha2delta3-/- IC units. The loss of precision of temporal coding with increasing fm from 70 Hz to 160 Hz was characterized using a normalized offset-corrected (Pearson-like) correlation coefficient, which appeared more appropriate than the metrics of vector strength. The processing deficits of AM sounds analyzed at the level of the IC indicate that alpha2delta3-/- mice exhibit a subcortical auditory processing disorder. Similar deficits may be present in other mouse models for autism spectrum disorders.Significance statementHuman speech and animal vocalization contain amplitude-modulated (AM) sounds. Perception of AM sounds requires correct processing of auditory signals in cochlea, auditory brainstem and the inferior colliculus (IC). We have analyzed the ability of IC neurons (units) to extract AM sounds in mice lacking the Cacna2d3 gene encoding the alpha2delta3 subunit of voltage-activated calcium channels, which are important for proper function of excitatory synapses. With increasing modulation frequencies, units of alpha2delta3-/- mice showed reduced evoked activity, less precise temporal coding, and longer response latencies compared with units of alpha2delta3+/+ mice. Humans lacking Cacna2d3 exhibit genetic autism, a neurodevelopmental disorder often accompanied by impaired auditory processing. We propose Cacna2d3 as a candidate gene linking an auditory processing disorder with genetic autism.
35410794|a|Most large-scale genetic studies of autism have focused on the discovery of genes by proving an enrichment of de novo mutations (DNMs) in autism probands or characterizing polygenic risk based on the association of common variants. We present evidence in support of an oligogenic model where two or more ultrarare mutations of more modest effect are preferentially transmitted to children with autism. Such private gene-disruptive mutations are enriched in families where there are multiple affected individuals, emerged two or three generations ago, and map to genes not previously associated with autism. Although no single gene has reached statistical significance, this class of variation should be considered along with genetic and nongenetic factors to better explain the etiology of this complex trait.
35410735|a|BACKGROUND: There is a well-established association between emotional and behavioral problems in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), unmet family support needs, and psychological distress in their parents. However, no studies hypothesized a buffering effect of marital relationship satisfaction. AIM: The aim of this research was to investigate the moderating effect of marital relationship satisfaction in the associations among emotional and behavioral problems in children with ASD, unmet family support needs, and anxiety and depression of their parents in the context of Saudi Arabia. DESIGN AND METHODS: This cross-sectional study recruited parents from five rehabilitation centers for children with ASD in Saudi Arabia. Data were collected with surveys completed online. A sample of 93 parents (84% female, 4.3% were 24 or younger, 36.2% between 25 and 34 years old, 40.5% between 35 and 44, and 14.7% between 45 and 54) of children with ASD was obtained. Two models of multiple regression analysis were performed to determine the relationships. RESULTS: About 56% of the parents had anxiety symptoms and 60% had depressive symptoms. Emotional and behavioral problems of children and higher levels of unmet family support needs were associated with higher levels of anxiety in parents, and adaptive behavior of children was associated with reduced levels of depression in parents. Relationship satisfaction moderated the impact of children's emotional and behavioral problems on parental anxiety. CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: The study highlighted the importance of marital relationship satisfaction in buffering the negative effects of ASD-related factors of children on the psychological well-being of their parents.
35410641|a|Autism or autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a behavioral syndrome characterized by persistent deficits in social interaction, and repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities. The gene encoding Methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2) is one of a few exceptional genes of established causal effect in ASD. Although genetically engineered mice studies may shed light on how MeCP2 loss affects synaptic activity patterns across the whole brain, such studies are not considered practical in ASD patients due to the overall level of impairment, and are technically challenging in mice. For the first time, we show that hippocampal MeCP2 knockdown produces behavioral abnormalities associated with autism-like traits in rats, providing a new strategy to investigate the efficacy of therapeutics in ASD. Ketamine, an N-Methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) blocker, has been proposed as a possible treatment for autism. Using the MeCP2 knockdown rats in conjunction with a rat model of valproic acid (VPA)-induced ASD, we examined gene expression and ASD behaviors upon ketamine treatment. We report that the core symptoms of autism in MeCP2 knockdown rats with social impairment recovered dramatically following a single treatment with ketamine.
35410610|a|BACKGROUND: This review aimed to determine the association assisted reproductive technology (ART) and increase the chances of having an autistic child. METHODS: The Web of Science, PubMed, and Scopus databases were systematically searched for studies published until December 2020 with the restricted English language. The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) for cohort and case-control studies has been used for the evaluation of quality in individual studies. We evaluated the heterogeneity among the studies using I-squared. Publication bias was assessed using the funnel plot and Egger's and Begg's tests. We presented results using odds ratio (OR) and relative ratio (RR) estimates with its 95% confidence intervals (CI) using a random-effects model. RESULTS: In total, 18 articles were included in the present study. The overall findings of the present meta-analysis show that the use of ART didn't associate with the risk of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) among offspring based on OR and RR (OR = 1.04, 95% CI: 0.88-1.21) and (RR = 1 .26, 95% CI: 0.96- 1 .55), respectively. We showed a significant association between ART and the risk of ASD in Asia than in the other regions without heterogeneity. CONCLUSION: Our result showed that the risk of ASD was not increased in children born from ART. Possible interaction between ART and other regions with increased risk of ASD is important to point and future studies of this topic were recommended.
35410515|a|BACKGROUND: As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, medical practices for children with neurodevelopmental disorders urgently adopted telehealth, despite limited data regarding patient satisfaction. OBJECTIVE: To compare patient satisfaction survey scores for neurodevelopmental pediatric appointments completed in-person to appointments completed via telemedicine. METHODS: Using routinely collected Press Ganey survey results, the proportion of Top Box scores (the percentage of responses in the highest possible category [ie, the percentage of "very good" or "always" responses]) for an in-person only group was compared to the proportion in a telemedicine-only group using Fisher's exact test. RESULTS: Most respondents gave Top-Box scores in response to all of the questions for both in-person and telemedicine visits. There were no statistically significant differences in any domain of the Press Ganey surveys in Top Box percentages for in-person vs telemedicine visits. CONCLUSION: This study provides preliminary evidence that telehealth may be an acceptable modality for families seeking care for their children with neurodevelopmental concerns.
35409689|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is characterized by deficits in social skills and specific behaviors and interests. Among other environmental factors, iron may play a role in the development of ASD. The aim of this study is to compare the iron status of children with ASD with that of children affected by neurodevelopmental disorders other than ASD (OND). A total of 167 patients were enrolled, including 93 children with ASD and 74 children with OND. In the two groups, we determined ferritin, iron, transferrin, hemoglobin, HCT, and MCV in the serum. We found a significant difference in serum ferritin and MCV levels between the two groups (p < 0.05), with lower ferritin and higher MCV values in the ASD group. There was no significant association with the other variables. Our results may support the hypothesis of altered iron status in ASD, justifying more frequent examinations of blood iron parameters in these children.
35409528|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) covers a range of neurodevelopmental disorders that begin in early childhood and affects developmental activities. This condition can negatively influence the gaining of knowledge, skills, and abilities, such as communication. Over time, different techniques and methods have been put into practice to teach and communicate with children with ASD. With the rapid advancement in the field of technology, specifically in smartphones, researchers have generated creative applications, such as mobile serious games, to help children with ASD. However, usability and accessibility have not been often taken into account in the development of this type of applications. For that reason, in this work we considered that both, usability and especially accessibility are a very important differentiators for the quality and efficiency of mobile serious games. Our approach has two important contributions, the incorporation of accessibility as a fundamental requirement in the development of a mobile serious game and the proposal of a method for the development of this type of applications for children with ASD, a method that can be used by other developers.
35409492|a|The adult autism subthreshold spectrum model appears to be a useful tool for detecting possible vulnerability factors in order to develop mental disorders in the contest of work-related stress. The aim of the present study is to analyze the relationship between autism, mood, and post-traumatic spectrum in a cohort of subjects complaining of work-related stress before the COVID-19 pandemic. The authors carried out a retrospective investigation of both medical records and self-assessment tools of a sample of subjects evaluated at the Occupational Health Department of a University hospital in central Italy. Data showed significant correlations between the AdAS spectrum, TALS-SR, and MOODS total and domain scores. A multiple linear regression evidenced that both the AdAS spectrum and TAL-SR significantly predict the MOODS scores. In particular, mediation analysis showed both a direct and indirect, mediated by TALS-SR, effect of the AdAS Spectrum on the MOODS-SR. These results corroborate the role of autistic traits in influencing the traumatic impact of work-related stress and the development of mood spectrum symptoms.
35409432|a|Increasing evidence exists for an association between early life fine particulate matter (PM2.5) exposure and several neurodevelopmental outcomes, including autism spectrum disorder (ASD); however, the association between PM2.5 and adaptive and cognitive function remains poorly understood. Participants included 658 children with ASD, 771 with a non-ASD developmental disorder, and 849 population controls from the Study to Explore Early Development. Adaptive functioning was assessed in ASD cases using the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales (VABS); cognitive functioning was assessed in all groups using the Mullen Scales of Early Learning (MSEL). A satellite-based model was used to assign PM2.5 exposure averages during pregnancy, each trimester, and the first year of life. Linear regression was used to estimate beta coefficients and 95% confidence intervals, adjusting for maternal age, education, prenatal tobacco use, race-ethnicity, study site, and season of birth. PM2.5 exposure was associated with poorer VABS scores for several domains, including daily living skills and socialization. Associations were present between prenatal PM2.5 and lower MSEL scores for all groups combined; results were most prominent for population controls in stratified analyses. These data suggest that early life PM2.5 exposure is associated with specific aspects of cognitive and adaptive functioning in children with and without ASD.
35409253|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are pervasive neurodevelopmental disorders that include a variety of forms and clinical phenotypes. This heterogeneity complicates the clinical and experimental approaches to ASD etiology and pathophysiology. To date, a unifying theory of these diseases is still missing. Nevertheless, the intense work of researchers and clinicians in the last decades has identified some ASD hallmarks and the primary brain areas involved. Not surprisingly, the areas that are part of the so-called "social brain", and those strictly connected to them, were found to be crucial, such as the prefrontal cortex, amygdala, hippocampus, limbic system, and dopaminergic pathways. With the recent acknowledgment of the cerebellar contribution to cognitive functions and the social brain, its involvement in ASD has become unmistakable, though its extent is still to be elucidated. In most cases, significant advances were made possible by recent technological developments in structural/functional assessment of the human brain and by using mouse models of ASD. Mouse models are an invaluable tool to get insights into the molecular and cellular counterparts of the disease, acting on the specific genetic background generating ASD-like phenotype. Given the multifaceted nature of ASD and related studies, it is often difficult to navigate the literature and limit the huge content to specific questions. This review fulfills the need for an organized, clear, and state-of-the-art perspective on cerebellar involvement in ASD, from its connections to the social brain areas (which are the primary sites of ASD impairments) to the use of monogenic mouse models.
35409220|a|Disturbances in the glutamatergic system have been increasingly documented in several neuropsychiatric disorders, including autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Glutamate-centered theories of ASD are based on evidence from patient samples and postmortem studies, as well as from studies documenting abnormalities in glutamatergic gene expression and metabolic pathways, including changes in the gut microbiota glutamate metabolism in patients with ASD. In addition, preclinical studies on animal models have demonstrated glutamatergic neurotransmission deficits and altered expression of glutamate synaptic proteins. At present, there are no approved glutamatergic drugs for ASD, but several ongoing clinical trials are currently focusing on evaluating in autistic patients glutamatergic pharmaceuticals already approved for other conditions. In this review, we provide an overview of the literature concerning the role of glutamatergic neurotransmission in the pathophysiology of ASD and as a potential target for novel treatments.
35408865|a|PCDH19 clustering epilepsy (PCDH19-CE) is a genetic disease characterized by a heterogeneous phenotypic spectrum ranging from focal epilepsy with rare seizures and normal cognitive development to severe drug-resistant epilepsy associated with intellectual disability and autism. Unfortunately, little is known about the pathogenic mechanism underlying this disease and an effective treatment is lacking. Studies with zebrafish and murine models have provided insights on the function of PCDH19 during brain development and how its altered function causes the disease, but these models fail to reproduce the human phenotype. Induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology has provided a complementary experimental approach for investigating the pathogenic mechanisms implicated in PCDH19-CE during neurogenesis and studying the pathology in a more physiological three-dimensional (3D) environment through the development of brain organoids. We report on recent progress in the development of human brain organoids with a particular focus on how this 3D model may shed light on the pathomechanisms implicated in PCDH19-CE.
35408139|a|In the context in which it was demonstrated that humanoid robots are efficient in helping children diagnosed with autism in exploring their affective state, this paper underlines and proves the efficiency of a previously developed machine learning-based mobile application called PandaSays, which was improved and integrated with an Alpha 1 Pro robot, and discusses performance evaluations using deep convolutional neural networks and residual neural networks. The model trained with MobileNet convolutional neural network had an accuracy of 56.25%, performing better than ResNet50 and VGG16. A strategy for commanding the Alpha 1 Pro robot without its native application was also established and a robot module was developed that includes the communication protocols with the application PandaSays. The output of the machine learning algorithm involved in PandaSays is sent to the humanoid robot to execute some actions as singing, dancing, and so on. Alpha 1 Pro has its own programming language-Blockly-and, in order to give the robot specific commands, Bluetooth programming is used, with the help of a Raspberry Pi. Therefore, the robot motions can be controlled based on the corresponding protocols. The tests have proved the robustness of the whole solution.
35406805|a|Neuronal growth regulator 1 (NEGR1) is a brain-enriched membrane protein that is involved in neural cell communication and synapse formation. Accumulating evidence indicates that NEGR1 is a generic risk factor for various psychiatric diseases including autism and depression. Endoglycosidase digestion of single NEGR1 mutants revealed that the wild type NEGR1 has six putative N-glycosylation sites partly organized in a Golgi-dependent manner. To understand the role of each putative N-glycan residue, we generated a series of multi-site mutants (2MT-6MT) with additive mutations. Cell surface staining and biotinylation revealed that NEGR1 mutants 1MT to 4MT were localized on the cell surface at different levels, whereas 5MT and 6MT were retained in the endoplasmic reticulum to form highly stable multimer complexes. This indicated 5MT and 6MT are less likely to fold correctly. Furthermore, the removal of two N-terminal sites N75 and N155 was sufficient to completely abrogate membrane targeting. An in vivo binding assay using the soluble NEGR1 protein demonstrated that glycans N286, N294 and N307 on the C-terminal immunoglobulin-like domain play important roles in homophilic interactions. Taken together, these results suggest that the N-glycan moieties of NEGR1 are closely involved in the folding, trafficking, and homodimer formation of NEGR1 protein in a site-specific manner.
35406109|a|Currently, due to the large number of reports regarding the harmfulness of food additives, more and more consumers follow the so-called "clean label" trend, i.e., prefer and choose the least-processed food products. One of the compounds known as a preservative with a high safety profile is sodium benzoate. While some studies show that it can be used to treat conditions such as depression, pain, schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorders, and neurodegenerative diseases, others report its harmfulness. For example, it was found to cause mutagenic effects, generate oxidative stress, disrupt hormones, and reduce fertility. Due to such disparate results, the purpose of this study is to comprehensively discuss the safety profile of sodium benzoate and its potential use in neurodegenerative diseases, especially in autism spectrum disorder (ASD), schizophrenia, major depressive disorder (MDD), and pain relief.
35406084|a|This systematic review aims to offer an updated understanding of the relationship between gastrointestinal symptoms (GIS) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in children and adolescents. The databases PsycINFO, Medline, Cinahl, and ERIC were searched using keywords, and relevant literature was hand-searched. Papers (n = 3319) were systematically screened and deemed eligible if they were empirical studies published in English since 2014 and measured the GIS of individuals with ASD who were under 18 years old. Thirty studies were included in the final review. The study findings were synthesized under eight themes, including the prevalence and nature of GIS and their relationship with developmental regression, language and communication, ASD severity, challenging behavior, comorbid psychopathology, sleep problems, and sensory issues. The review found that GIS were common and that there was contradictory evidence concerning their relationship with co-occurring conditions. It also identified evidence of some causal relationships that support the existence of the gut-immune-brain pathways. Future research needs to use large prospective designs and objective and standardized GIS measurements to provide a nuanced understanding of GIS in the context of ASD.
35406004|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by impairments in social interaction, communication skills, and repetitive and restrictive behaviors and interests. Even though there is a biological basis for an effect of specific nutrition factors on ASD symptoms and there is scientific literature available on this relationship, whether nutrition factors could play a role in ASD treatment is unclear. The goal of the current literature review was to summarize the available scientific literature on the relation between nutrition and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) symptoms in childhood, and to formulate practical dietary guidelines. A comprehensive search strategy including terms for ASD, nutrition factors (therapeutic diets, dietary patterns, specific food products, fatty acids and micronutrients) and childhood was developed and executed in six literature databases (Cinahl, Cochrane, Ovid Embase, PsycInfo, PubMed and Web of Science). Data from meta-analyses, systematic reviews and original studies were qualitatively summarized. A total of 5 meta-analyses, 29 systematic reviews and 27 original studies were retrieved that focused on therapeutic diets, specific food products, fatty acids and micronutrients and ASD symptoms during childhood. Results of the available studies were sparse and inconclusive, and hence, no firm conclusions could be drawn. There is currently insufficient evidence for a relation between nutrition and ASD symptoms in childhood, making it impossible to provide practical nutrition guidelines; more methodological sound research is needed.
35405953|a|Intestinal microorganisms impact health by maintaining gut homeostasis and shaping the host immunity, while gut dysbiosis associates with many conditions, including autism, a complex neurodevelopmental disorder with multifactorial aetiology. In autism, gut dysbiosis correlates with symptom severity and is characterised by a reduced bacterial variability and a diminished beneficial commensal relationship. Microbiota can influence the expression of host microRNAs that, in turn, regulate the growth of intestinal bacteria by means of bidirectional host-gut microbiota cross-talk. We investigated possible interactions among intestinal microbes and between them and host transcriptional modulators in autism. To this purpose, we analysed, by "omics" technologies, faecal microbiome, mycobiome, and small non-coding-RNAs (particularly miRNAs and piRNAs) of children with autism and neurotypical development. Patients displayed gut dysbiosis related to a reduction of healthy gut micro- and mycobiota as well as up-regulated transcriptional modulators. The targets of dysregulated non-coding-RNAs are involved in intestinal permeability, inflammation, and autism. Furthermore, microbial families, underrepresented in patients, participate in the production of human essential metabolites negatively influencing the health condition. Here, we propose a novel approach to analyse faeces as a whole, and for the first time, we detected miRNAs and piRNAs in faecal samples of patients with autism.
35405951|a|BACKGROUND: This study examined foods packed and consumed by children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and calculated the percentage of packed school lunches meeting National School Lunch Program (NSLP) standards. Fruit and vegetable (FV) consumption was further examined by investigating its association with the number and type of foods packed. METHODS: Participants included 59 private school students observed for five school meals. Servings of foods and beverages packed and consumed and the percentages of correspondence between food packed and consumed were calculated. Next, the percentages of lunches meeting NSLP guidelines were calculated. Finally, mealtime means were calculated for the number of foods packed, FVs packed, and FVs consumed. RESULTS: There was a high correspondence between foods packed and consumed. Fresh fruits and sugar-added drinks were most often packed and consumed. The percentage of meals meeting NSLP guidelines was higher than previous non-ASD samples. More FV consumption was associated with more FVs packed and fewer total foods packed. FV consumption was highest with 4 < 5 foods packed, including 2+ FVs. CONCLUSIONS: Future studies should compare foods packed and consumed by children with and without ASD. The FV consumption findings suggest parents may increase children's FV consumption by packing approximately four total foods with two FVs.
35405770|a|BACKGROUND: Previous longitudinal studies have demonstrated that psychosocial outcomes for autistic adults are very limited. However, most studies are clinic-based and liable to selection bias and major methodological problems. METHODS: We conducted a long-term follow-up study with 278 autistic individuals from our previous birth cohort study comprising 31,426 individuals. All participants were born in northern Yokohama between 1988 and 1996, diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) by age seven, and followed up over 20 years. A total of 170 consented to participate in the study. Outcome measures included overall social functioning based on work, independent living, and friendships. Moreover, the time-use data concerning social participation and activities of daily living were compared with the general population. RESULTS: Psychosocial outcomes in adulthood (average age 25) were very good in 13.7%, good in 25.0%, fair in 31.0%, poor in 25.6%, and very poor in 4.8% of the participants. The majority participated in major life areas of and work and education (96.4%), sports (82.1%), and recreational activities and/or hobbies (98.8%). The proportion of participants who engaged in housework and self-care was comparable to that of the general population. Participants with IQ < 50 at age five had significantly worse outcomes than those with higher IQ; however, for those with IQ >= 50, outcomes were not significantly associated with IQ levels. CONCLUSIONS: Although complete independence was difficult to accomplish, many autistic adults engaged in organized community activities and housework and self-care. Time-use survey could offer a variety of data in investigating psychosocial outcomes of ASD cross-culturally.
35405634|a|Lower levels of physical activity (PA) are often observed among children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) compared to children without ASD; however, some studies have demonstrated few to no PA differences between the two groups. The purpose of this systematic review with meta-analysis was to compare the differences in PA between children (2-18 years) with and without ASD. An exhaustive search of five online databases was completed, and 31 studies met the inclusion criteria. A pooled random-effects Hedges's g model was used to determine differences in PA between children with and without ASD. Children with ASD were found to be significantly less physically active than children without ASD (Delta = -0.62, p < .001). Subgroup analyses revealed significant moderate to large differences in PA by intensity level, age, setting, and measurement methods. Future studies are needed to further explore the underlying mechanisms associated with lower levels of PA among children with ASD.
35405305|a|The most important advancement in the treatment of destructive behavior has been the development of the functional analysis, which is used to prescribe effective treatments like functional communication training. Although this approach can be highly effective, extinction bursts and forms of treatment relapse commonly occur when function-based treatments are implemented by caregivers in natural community settings. In recent years, researchers have increasingly applied quantitative theories of behavior like behavioral momentum theory (BMT) and the temporally weighted matching law (TWML) to understand, prevent, or mitigate extinction bursts and treatment relapse. In this paper, we describe BMT and TWML and selectively review the basic, translational, and applied research supporting and opposing each theory. Then, we describe how function-based treatments may be refined based on these theories to improve the effectiveness, generality, and durability of function-based treatments for individuals with autism spectrum and related disorders who display problem behavior.
35404160|a|LAY ABSTRACT: People learn they are autistic at different ages. We wanted to know if telling kids they are autistic earlier helps them feel better about their lives when they grow up. We are a team of autistic and non-autistic students and professors. Seventy-eight autistic university students did our online survey. They shared how they found out they were autistic and how they felt about being autistic. They also shared how they feel about their lives now. Around the same number of students learned they were autistic from doctors and parents. Students who learned they were autistic when they were younger felt happier about their lives than people who learned they were autistic when they were older. Students who learned they were autistic when they were older felt happier about being autistic when they first found out than people who did not have to wait as long. Our study shows that it is probably best to tell people they are autistic as soon as possible. The students who did our study did not think it was a good idea to wait until children are adults to tell them they are autistic. They said that parents should tell their children they are autistic in ways that help them understand and feel good about who they are.
35403940|a|INTRODUCTION: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is an increasing concern among the Iraqi Arab population. The genetic alterations that cause ASD are likely to converge at the synapse. This study investigated polymorphisms in the GABAA receptor subunit (GABRG3) and the RELN gene as putative biomarkers of ASD in a pediatric population in Iraq. METHODS: The case control study included 60 patients with a clinical diagnosis of ASD (mild, moderate, or severe) according to DSM-IV criteria and matched healthy controls (n = 60). Blood samples were collected for DNA genotyping of SNPs rs736707 and rs208129 for RELN and GABRG3 using allele specific PCR. Assessment of genotype and allele distributions in patient groups used odd ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals and the Chi-square test. All statistical analysis was performed used SPSS software. RESULT: The patient cohort was highly consanguineous, with increased ratio (p > 0.05) of males to females (3:1) in both ASD (mean age, 6.66 +- 3.05) and controls (mean age, 5.76 +- 2.3). Both GABRG3 rs208129 genotypes TT (OR 4.33, p = 0.0015) and TA (OR 0.259, P = 0.008), and the T and A alleles were significantly associated with ASD. The RELN rs736707 TC genotype (OR 2.626, P = 0.034) was the only significant association with ASD. CONCLUSION: GABRG3 SNP rs208129 is a leading biomarker to predict genetic vulnerability to ASD in Iraqi Arabs. Expanded SNP panels and increased sample sizes are required for future GABRG3 studies, and to reach a consensus on RELN utility. Future ASD screening programs in Iraq should include genetic metrics in addition to clinical phenotype assessments.
35403926|a|
35403773|a|BACKGROUND: Social competence training for individuals with comorbid autistic spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellectual disability was scarce and had methodological limitations in sample sizes and outcome measures. AIMS: The current study addressed the limitations and reported a social competence intervention for adolescents and adults with ASD and intellectual disability in Hong Kong, the CBT-CSCA (Mild Intellectual Disability). MATERIALS & METHODS: Thirty-three participants (aged 14-44 years, with an FSIQ 55-70) completed the 15-session intervention in a community centre. A pre-post intervention design was employed. Outcome measures included proxy-ratings on participants' social competence, autistic symptoms and behavioural problem, and participants' weekly self-evaluation on knowledge acquisition and confidence in applying skills. RESULTS: Significant improvements were shown in proxy-reported negative social behaviours, autistic symptoms and overall behavioural problems. Participants also reported satisfactory knowledge gain and confidence in applying content learnt after each session. DISCUSSION: The CBT-CSCA (Mild Intellectual Disability) is based on an established model and validated studies on ASD population. It demonstrated its applicability and emerging effectiveness in individuals with ASD and mild intellectual disability. CONCLUSION: The study supports that social competence training remains a centrality intervention approach for individuals with ASD and intellectual disability.
35403450|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Children with autism typically experience difficulties interacting socially with others when compared to their non-autistic peers. Establishing how effective interventions are for improving social functioning is important to help inform what should be offered to children with autism. This study reviewed how effective interventions that involved interaction with a live animal, known as animal-assisted interventions, are in improving social functioning in children with autism. A systematic search of the evidence on this topic found nine studies, which were explored for the effectiveness of animal-assisted interventions and the quality of methods used. Overall, these studies showed improvements in social functioning following equine-assisted or therapeutic horse-riding interventions, with initial evidence showing improvements are sustained in the short and medium term. However, several issues were identified, which limit the strength of any conclusions that can be drawn from this evidence. For example, in many studies people assessing the children were aware that they received the intervention or were in a control group. There was also not enough evidence available to draw conclusions on the effectiveness of other animal-assisted interventions. Future research should address the limitations that were common in the designs of these studies and investigate the potential benefit of other animal populations, such as dogs and cats.
35403446|a|LAY ABSTRACT: The early detection of autism spectrum disorder can lead to access to autism spectrum disorder-specific services that have been shown to have a large impact on a child's overall development. Although a stable diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder can be made by age 2 years, most children are not diagnosed until much later. To address this issue, this study examined the effectiveness of training Part C Early Intervention providers to use an interactive autism spectrum disorder screening tool, the Screening Tool for Autism in Toddlers. Sixty-nine providers attended a 1-day training workshop on the use of the Screening Tool for Autism in Toddlers. After the workshop, providers reported increased knowledge about recognizing the early signs of autism spectrum disorder, and about 45% of the providers reported using the Screening Tool for Autism in Toddlers with families in their caseloads 18 months after the training. These results suggest that the Screening Tool for Autism in Toddlers is feasible for use within Early Intervention settings. In addition, they suggest that specific providers might serve as a screening "point-person," rather than expecting the Screening Tool for Autism in Toddlers to be used by all providers. Future research should aim to identify specific characteristics of agencies or providers that might be best suited for using the Screening Tool for Autism in Toddlers.
35403356|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is associated with altered gut microbiota. However, there has been little consensus on the altered bacterial species and studies have had small sample sizes. We aimed to identify the taxonomic composition and evaluate the changes in the fecal microbiota in Chinese children with ASD by using a relatively large sample size. We conducted a case-control study of 101 children with ASD and 103 healthy controls in China. Demographic information and fecal samples were collected, and the V3-V4 hypervariable regions of the bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene were sequenced. The alpha and beta diversities between the two groups were significantly different. After correcting for multiple comparisons, at the phylum level the relative abundances of Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria in the case group were significantly higher than those in the control group. The relative abundance of the Escherichia-Shigella genus in the case group was significantly higher than that of the control group, and the relative abundance of Blautia and unclassified_f__Lachnospiraceae in the control group were higher than that of the case group. Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States analysis showed that children with ASD may have disturbed functional pathways, such as amino acid metabolism, cofactor and vitamin metabolism, and the AMP-activated protein kinase signaling pathway. This study revealed the characteristics of the intestinal flora of Chinese children with ASD and provided further evidence of gut microbial dysbiosis in ASD. LAY SUMMARY: This study characterized the gut microbiota composition of 101 children with ASD and 103 healthy controls in China. The altered gut microbiota may contribute significantly to the risk of ASD, including significant increases in the relative abundances of Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria and Escherichia-Shigella and significant decrease of Blautia and unclassified_f__Lachnospiraceae. This study provided further evidence of gut microbial dysbiosis in ASD.
35401938|a|Observational behavior analysis plays a key role for the discovery and evaluation of risk markers for many neurodevelopmental disorders. Research on autism spectrum disorder (ASD) suggests that behavioral risk markers can be observed at 12 months of age or earlier, with diagnosis possible at 18 months. To date, these studies and evaluations involving observational analysis tend to rely heavily on clinical practitioners and specialists who have undergone intensive training to be able to reliably administer carefully designed behavioural-eliciting tasks, code the resulting behaviors, and interpret such behaviors. These methods are therefore extremely expensive, time-intensive, and are not easily scalable for large population or longitudinal observational analysis. We developed a self-contained, closed-loop, mobile application with movie stimuli designed to engage the child's attention and elicit specific behavioral and social responses, which are recorded with a mobile device camera and then analyzed via computer vision algorithms. Here, in addition to presenting this paradigm, we validate the system to measure engagement, name-call responses, and emotional responses of toddlers with and without ASD who were presented with the application. Additionally, we show examples of how the proposed framework can further risk marker research with fine-grained quantification of behaviors. The results suggest these objective and automatic methods can be considered to aid behavioral analysis, and can be suited for objective automatic analysis for future studies.
35401865|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by aberrant functional connectivity (FC) within/between certain large-scale brain networks. Although relatively lower level of FC between default mode network (DMN) regions (i.e., DMN-FC) has been detected in many previous studies, they failed to capture the temporal dynamic features of DMN-FC and were limited by small sample size. Here, the dynamical conditional correlation, which could assess precise FC at each time point and has been proved to be a technique with high test-retest reliability, was applied to investigate the DMN-FC pattern of patients with ASD from the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange, which included functional and structural brain imaging data of more than 1000 participants. The data analysis here showed that compared to typical developing (TD) participants, patients with ASD exhibited significantly lower mean DMN-FC level across recording time, but significantly higher variance of DMN-FC level across recording time. Moreover, these alterations were significantly associated with symptom severity of patients, especially their impaired communication skills and repetitive behaviors. These results support the view that aberrant temporal dynamic of FC within DMN is an important neuropathological feature of ASD and is a potential biomarker for ASD diagnosis. Supplementary Information: The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s11571-021-09723-9.
35401352|a|This study explored the relations between the social support network of mothers of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), perceived social support, and their subjective wellbeing. The participants were mothers of children with ASD in Shanghai. Their social support network structure was explored via the nomination method. Perceived social support was measured using the Revised Social Provisions Scale for Autism (R-SPS-A), and the mothers' subjective wellbeing was assessed using the Index of Wellbeing, Index of General Affect. A significant correlation was observed between the subjective wellbeing of mothers of children with ASD and perceived social support. Meanwhile, perceived social support was significantly correlated with the effectiveness of overall social support. Finally, perceived social support was also significantly correlated with the network size of social support. Moreover, the effectiveness of social support was significantly associated with the network size of social support and was highly significantly associated with the degree of intimacy of social support. Furthermore, the network size of instrumental support has a significant influence on all perceived social support subdimensions. Overall, social support effectiveness plays an important role in the social support network mechanism on perceived social support and subjective wellbeing in China.
35401260|a|People with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are represented among those who espouse extremist thought and have committed violent acts associated with their beliefs. Media often highlight a perpetrator's psychiatric diagnosis following acts of mass violence, which in some instances has included ASD. ASD may itself not provide useful information for understanding motivations. Instead, understanding specific traits and neuropsychological and other vulnerabilities may offer an opportunity to make sense of these very complex events.
35401255|a|Little is known about the trajectory patterns and sex differences in adaptive behaviors in the general population. We examined the trajectory classes of adaptive behaviors using a representative sample and examined whether the class structure and trajectory patterns differed between females and males. We further explored sex differences in neurodevelopmental traits in each latent class. Participants (n = 994) were children in the Hamamatsu Birth Cohort for Mothers and Children (HBC Study)-a prospective birth cohort study. Adaptive behaviors in each domain of communication, daily living skills, and socialization were evaluated at five time points when participants were 2.7, 3.5, 4.5, 6, and 9 years old using the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales-Second Edition. Parallel process multigroup latent class growth analysis extracted sex-specific trajectory classes. Neurodevelopmental traits of children at age 9, autistic traits, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) traits, and cognitive ability were examined for females and males in each identified class. A 4-class model demonstrated the best fit. Moreover, a 4-class model that allowed for differences in class probabilities and means of growth parameters between females and males provided a better fit than a model assuming no sex differences. In the communication domain, females scored higher than their male counterparts in all four classes. In the daily living skills and socialization domains, the two higher adaptive classes (Class 1: females, 18.6%; males, 17.8%; Class 2: females, 48.8%; males, 49.8%) had similar trajectories for males and females, whereas in the two lower adaptive behavior classes (Class 3: females, 27.5%; males, 29.4%; Class 4: females, 5.1%; males, 3.0%), females had higher adaptive scores than their male counterparts. In Class 4, females were more likely to have autistic and ADHD traits exceeding the cutoffs, while males were more likely to have below-average IQ. Different trajectories in females and males suggest that adaptive skills may require adjustment based on the sex of the child, when standardizing scores, in order to achieve better early detection of skill impairment.
35401134|a|Normal neurodevelopment requires precise expression of the key ubiquitin ligase gene Ube3a. Comparing newly generated mouse models for Ube3a downregulation (models of Angelman syndrome) vs. Ube3a upregulation (models for autism), we find reciprocal effects of Ube3a gene dosage on phenotypes associated with circadian rhythmicity, including the amount of locomotor activity. Consistent with results from neurons in general, we find that Ube3a is imprinted in neurons of the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN), the pacemaking circadian brain locus, despite other claims that SCN neurons were somehow exceptional to these imprinting rules. In addition, Ube3a-deficient mice lack the typical drop in wake late in the dark period and have blunted responses to sleep deprivation. Suppression of physical activity by light in Ube3a-deficient mice is not due to anxiety as measured by behavioral tests and stress hormones; quantification of stress hormones may provide a mechanistic link to sleep alteration and memory deficits caused by Ube3a deficiency, and serve as an easily measurable biomarker for evaluating potential therapeutic treatments for Angelman syndrome. We conclude that reduced Ube3a gene dosage affects not only neurodevelopment but also sleep patterns and circadian rhythms.
35401097|a|The brain is the central and most complex organ in the nervous system, comprising billions of neurons that constantly communicate through trillions of connections called synapses. Despite being formed mainly during prenatal and early postnatal development, synapses are continually refined and eliminated throughout life via complicated and hitherto incompletely understood mechanisms. Failure to correctly regulate the numbers and distribution of synapses has been associated with many neurological and psychiatric disorders, including autism, epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease, and schizophrenia. Therefore, measurements of brain synaptic density, as well as early detection of synaptic dysfunction, are essential for understanding normal and abnormal brain development. To date, multiple synaptic density markers have been proposed and investigated in experimental models of brain disorders. The majority of the gold standard methodologies (e.g., electron microscopy or immunohistochemistry) visualize synapses or measure changes in pre- and postsynaptic proteins ex vivo. However, the invasive nature of these classic methodologies precludes their use in living organisms. The recent development of positron emission tomography (PET) tracers [such as (18F)UCB-H or (11C)UCB-J] that bind to a putative synaptic density marker, the synaptic vesicle 2A (SV2A) protein, is heralding a likely paradigm shift in detecting synaptic alterations in patients. Despite their limited specificity, novel, non-invasive magnetic resonance (MR)-based methods also show promise in inferring synaptic information by linking to glutamate neurotransmission. Although promising, all these methods entail various advantages and limitations that must be addressed before becoming part of routine clinical practice. In this review, we summarize and discuss current ex vivo and in vivo methods of quantifying synaptic density, including an evaluation of their reliability and experimental utility. We conclude with a critical assessment of challenges that need to be overcome before successfully employing synaptic density biomarkers as diagnostic and/or prognostic tools in the study of neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders.
35401002|a|Background: Previous studies have indicated abnormal gray matter volume (GMV) in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD); however, there is little consistency across the findings within these studies, partly due to small sample size and great heterogeneity among participants between studies. Additionally, few studies have explored the correlation between clinical symptoms and GMV abnormalities in individuals with ASD. Here, the current study examined GMV alterations in whole brain and their correlations with clinical symptoms in a relatively large and homogeneous sample of participants with ASD matched typically developing (TD) controls. Methods: Forty-eight adolescents with high-functioning ASD and 29 group-matched TD controls underwent structural magnetic resonance images. Voxel-based morphometry was applied to investigate regional GMV alterations. The participants with ASD were examined for the severity of clinical symptoms with Autism Behavior Checklist (ABC). The relationship between GMV abnormalities and clinical symptoms was explored in ASD group using voxel-wise correlation analysis within brain regions that showed significant GMV alterations in individuals with ASD compared with TD controls. Results: We found increased GMV in multiple brain regions, including the inferior frontal gyrus, medial frontal gyrus, superior frontal gyrus, superior temporal gyrus, occipital pole, anterior cingulate, cerebellum anterior lobe, cerebellum posterior lobe, and midbrain, as well as decreased GMV in cerebellum posterior lobe in individuals with ASD. The correlation analysis showed the GMV in the left fusiform was negatively associated with the scores of sensory factor, and the GMV in the right cerebellum anterior lobe was positively associated with the scores of social self-help factor. Conclusion: Our results indicated that widespread GMV abnormalities of brain regions occurred in individuals with ASD, suggesting a potential neural basis for the pathogenesis and symptomatology of ASD.
35400985|a|Many individuals diagnosed with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD) are uncooperative during routine dental exams, leading to poor oral health in this population. Few studies have evaluated methodologies for preparing dental students and professionals to work effectively with patients diagnosed with IDD. In this study, experimenters used remote behavioral skills training (BST) to train dental students and professionals how to implement a practical intervention that included tell-show-do, contingent praise, and noncontingent reinforcement. Results suggested that group training conducted via videoconferencing was effective for teaching six of seven participants to implement the intervention in the absence of post-training feedback. This approach appears useful for quickly and efficiently training current and future dental professionals to implement behavior techniques to promote patient compliance.
35400984|a|One of the earliest indicators of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is delay in language and social communication. Despite consensus on the benefits of earlier diagnosis and intervention, our understanding of the language growth of children with ASD during the first years of life remains limited. Therefore, this study compared communication growth patterns of infants and toddlers with ASD to growth benchmarks of a standardized language assessment. We conducted a retrospective analysis of growth on the Early Communication Indicator (ECI) of 23 infants and toddlers who received an ASD diagnosis in the future. At 42 months of age, children with ASD had significantly lower rates of gestures, single words, and multiple words, but significantly higher rates of nonword vocalizations. Children with ASD had significantly slower growth of single and multiple words, but their rate of vocalization growth was significantly greater than benchmark. Although more research is needed with larger samples, because the ECI was designed for practitioners to monitor children's response to intervention over time, these findings show promise for the ECI's use as a progress monitoring measure for young children with ASD. Limitations and the need for future research are discussed.
35400548|a|BACKGROUND: The PRRT2 gene located at 16p11.2 encodes proline-rich transmembrane protein 2. In recent reviews, clinical spectrum caused by pathogenic PRRT2 variants is designated as PRRT2-associated paroxysmal movement disorders, which include paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia, benign familial infantile epilepsy, and infantile convulsions with choreoathetosis, and hemiplegic migraine. The recurrent 16p11.2 microdeletion encompassing PRRT2 has also been reported to cause neurodevelopmental syndrome, associated with autism spectrum disorder. Although PRRT2 variants and 16p11.2 microdeletion cause each disease with the autosomal dominant manner, rare cases with bi-allelic PRRT2 variants or concurrent existence of PRRT2 variants and 16p11.2 microdeletion have been reported to show more severe phenotypes. CASE REPORT: A 22-year-old man presents with episodic ataxia, paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia, seizure, intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder. He also has obesity, hypertension, hyperuricemia, and mild liver dysfunction. Exome sequencing revealed a c.649dup variant in PRRT2 in one allele and a de novo 16p11.2 microdeletion in another allele. CONCLUSIONS: Our case showed combined clinical features of PRRT2-associated paroxysmal movement disorders and 16p11.2 microdeletion syndrome. We reviewed previous literatures and discussed phenotypic features of patients who completely lack the PRRT2 protein.
35400329|a|Savant syndrome is a rare unusual skill that occurs in the presence of severe developmental disabilities, disorders and injuries. The syndrome can appear either congenital as from birth through childhood or acquired as brain injury or central nervous system damage There are several findings which indicate that savant syndrome usually occurs with significant brain metabolism alterations resulting with critical brain network changes. These types of changes in the brain, usually explained by "tyranny of the left hemisphere" theory which indicates the inhibition of the left hemisphere allows the right hemisphere to develop the savant abilities. Another way to temporarily simulate these types of changes in the brain may obtain by different neuromodulation techniques such as transcranial magnetic stimulation and transcranial direct current stimulation. Such neuromodulation techniques might help us to discover the "hidden talent" potential through modulating the brain network metabolism. We herein discussed the types of savant syndrome along with relation to specific neurometabolic network alterations. Furthermore, we provide a perspective on how newly developed neuromodulation and cognitive rehabilitation techniques can help to simulate savant syndrome in healthy individuals through modulating the brain network activity.
35399934|a|
35399699|a|Background: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental disorder, which affects social communicative capabilities. The research study has shown that ASD studies are focused on young children, excluding adolescents and adults: and it is understudied in the context of South Africa. Objective: This study examined the interactional communication strategies of adolescents with ASD and health professionals during different treatment consultations to identify the interactional styles and communication strategies utilised by adolescents with ASD and their respective healthcare professionals in a variety of scenarios in order to generate management strategies for future healthcare professional communication training. Method: A multi-case study design with a qualitative research approach has been used. Four adolescents with a moderate form of ASD and four health practitioners were interviewed. Participants were chosen by purpose and snowball sampling. Semi-structured, open-ended interviews were used for health professionals to collect information on the various interaction types and communication methods used, as well as their interpretations of these methods. Conversely, adapted face-to-face interviews were used to collect similar knowledge from adolescents themselves. The findings were qualitatively analysed on a case-by-case and cross-case basis by thematic analysis techniques. Results: The findings indicated that ASD adolescents have interaction types that influence intervention to various degrees. In comparison to motor therapies such as occupational therapy and physiotherapy, interaction types have a greater impact on psychiatry and psychology, which depend mainly on verbal communication. Intuitively, to promote contact with these teens, all health practitioners changed their own interaction styles. They used techniques of clarification and repair. The therapists shared the intention to learn a range of successful ways to strengthen future experiences with ASD between themselves and adolescents. Conclusion: The findings indicate that practitioners can benefit from altering their interaction styles, and that approaches for promoting successful interactions and in establishing rapport could be shared with other professionals in the future.
35399303|a|Myiasis refers to the infestation of living vertebrae with fly larvae, principally occurring in individuals with a low socioeconomic status and poor personal hygiene. Myiasis is rarely manifested in the urogenital system. Herein, we report a case of urogenital myiasis in a 49-year-old rural woman complaining of maggots in the urine and severe genital itching.
35398720|a|BACKGROUND: Evaluation of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) includes caregiver-reported rating scales of symptom presentation. The extent to which a broad autism phenotype (BAP) in parents of children with ASD might impact their endorsement of autism symptoms in their children with and without ASD has not been well evaluated. AIMS: This study analyzed whether varying degrees of parental BAP were associated with reported autism symptoms in offspring with and without ASD. METHODS AND PROCEDURES: We used the Broad Autism Phenotype Questionnaire as a measure of BAP in parents and parent- and teacher-report on the Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS) to assess autism symptoms in children with ASD and their typically developing (TD) siblings (N = 5714). We assessed the relationship between parental BAP and parent-teacher discordance. We compared teacher reports of autism symptoms in children with varying degrees of BAP exposure. OUTCOMES AND RESULTS: Mothers with higher levels of BAP over-reported autism symptoms in their children (compared to teachers) than mothers with lower BAP. TD children from parents with greater BAP displayed more autism symptoms than children from households with less BAP. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: BAP is associated with parent report of autism symptoms when compared to teacher report. For children with ASD, it is possible that differences in ratings reflect parent perception and not autism symptomatology; whereas, TD children from households with higher levels of BAP exposure showed more phenotypic autism symptom presentation on teacher-completed measures. Researchers and clinicians should consider BAP when interpreting caregiver and teacher reports.
35398534|a|BACKGROUND: Autism is a clinically defined neurodevelopmental disorder with unknown origin characterized by significant social, communication and behavioral challenges. Although it can be a lifelong condition, treatments can help alleviate symptoms and enhance a patient's quality of life. PURPOSE: We aimed to assess the therapeutic potential of finasteride in autism with biochemical markers, histopathological evaluation, behavioral tests and radiological imaging. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Propionic acid (PPA) was injected intraperitoneally into 20 out of 30 rats for 5 days to establish an autism model. Rats were randomly assigned into four groups: control group (no procedure was applied, n=10), placebo group (intraperitoneal PPA + 1 ml/kg/day % 0.9 NaCl saline was given via oral gavage for 15 days, n=10) and treated group (intraperitoneal PPA + 5 mg/kg/day of finasteride was given via oral gavage for 15 days, n=10). After 4 days of behavioral tests, magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) was performed for measuring creatine and lactate levels. All animals were sacrificed for histopathological examination and biochemical analysis of brain tissue. RESULTS: MDA, NFkappaB, TNF-alpha, IL-2, IL-17A and lactate levels in brain homogenates were significantly increased in the placebo group compared to the control group, while Nfr2 levels were decreased; and the levels of all biochemical markers were reversed by finasteride treatment. A significant improvement was observed in autism-like behaviors in rats treated with finasteride compared to the placebo group. Further, the creatine and lactate levels in corpus striatum in MRS, the neuronal counts and glial activity of the hippocampus and cerebellum were closer to the control group in the finasteride-treated group compared to the placebo group. CONCLUSION: Finasteride led significant improvement in autism-like symptoms with its antioxidant effect through Nrf2 modulation in addition to its anti androgen effect.
35398487|a|Autism is a complex neurodevelopmental disease that may be caused by genetic and environmental factors, that are incompletely understood. Overactivation of dopaminergic receptors can lead to autistic-like behavior. beta-arrestin2 (Arrb2) is a scaffolding protein of the arrestin family, which function as cytosolic multifunctional adaptor proteins that activate cell signal transduction and mediate the signal termination and endocytosis of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) complexes. In this study, we established an Arrb2 knockout (Arrb2-/-) mouse to explore the biological function of Arrb2 in autistic-like behavior caused by abnormality in the dopaminergic system. We found that Arrb2-/- mice did not exhibit the autistic-like behavior normally induced by SKF38393, an agonist of the dopamine receptor 1 (D1R). Compared with wild-type (WT) untreated mice, the SKF38393-treated WT mice and Arrb2-/- mice, with or without SKF38393 treatment, showed abnormalities on electroencephalography (EEG) and increased stimulation of the phosphorylated form of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (p-ERK) via the PKA/Rap1/B-Raf/MEK pathway. These results demonstrated that Arrb2 regulated the dopaminergic system through the ERK signaling pathway in the occurrence and development of autism, and that targeted deletion of Arrb2 impeded the development of autistic-like behavior. DATA AVAILABILITY: All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article and its supplementary information files.
35397709|a|We aimed to screen children aged 18-48 months in the general population of nine Russian regions for risk of mental, behavioral and developmental disorders (MBDDs) including autism spectrum disorders (ASD) using an original screening tool. The prevalence of the risk for MBDDs is 1307:10,000 (13.07%), the prevalence of clinically verified cases of MBDDs is 151:10,000 (1.51%), whereas the prevalence of ASD among them is 18:10,000 (0.18%). Basing on our results, the screening procedures are already integrated into the Russian primary care system since the end of 2019. Screening of the risk for MBDDs including ASD in Russia among children in the general pediatric population is a promising area of preventive medicine.
35397066|a|Although autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is defined by impaired social communication and restricted and repetitive behaviors and interests, ASD is also characterized by impaired motivational processes. The "social motivation theory of autism" describes how social motivation disruptions in ASD in early childhood may impede the drive to engage in reciprocal social behaviors and ultimately interfere with the development of neural networks critical for social communication (Chevallier et al., Trends Cogn Sci 16:231-239, 2012b). Importantly, clinical studies and preclinical research using model organisms for ASD indicate that motivational impairments in ASD are not constrained to social rewards but are evident in response to a range of nonsocial rewards as well. Additionally, translational studies on certain genetically defined neurodevelopmental disorders associated with ASD indicate that these syndromic forms of ASD are also characterized by motivational deficits and mesolimbic dopamine impairments. In this chapter we summarize clinical and preclinical research relevant to reward processing impairments in ASD and related neurodevelopmental disorders. We also propose a nosology to describe reward processing impairments in these disorders that uses a three-axes model. In this triaxial nosology, the first axis defines the direction of the reward response (i.e., anhedonic, hyperhedonic); the second axis defines the construct of the reward process (e.g., reward liking, reward wanting); and the third axis defines the context of the reward response (e.g., social, nonsocial). A more precise nosology for describing reward processing impairments in ASD and related neurodevelopmental disorders will aid in the translation of preclinical research to clinical investigations which will ultimately help to speed up the development of interventions that target motivational systems for ASD and related neurodevelopmental disorders.
35396900|a|White-Sutton syndrome (WHSUS), which is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in POGZ, is characterized by a spectrum of intellectual disabilities and global developmental delay with or without features of autism spectrum disorder. Additional features may include hypotonia, behavioral abnormalities, ophthalmic abnormalities, hearing loss, sleep apnea, microcephaly, dysmorphic facial features, and rarely, congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH). We present a 6-year-old female with features of WHSUS, including CDH, but with nondiagnostic clinical trio exome sequencing. Exome sequencing reanalysis revealed a heterozygous, de novo, intronic variant in POGZ (NM_015100.3:c.2546-20T>A). RNA sequencing revealed that this intronic variant leads to skipping of exon 18. This exon skipping event results in a frameshift with a predicted premature stop codon in the last exon and escape from nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). To our knowledge, this case is the first case of WHSUS caused by a de novo, intronic variant that is not near a canonical splice site within POGZ. These findings emphasize the limitations of standard clinical exome filtering algorithms and the importance of research reanalysis of exome data together with RNA sequencing to confirm a suspected diagnosis of WHSUS. As the sixth reported case of CDH with heterozygous pathogenic variants in POGZ and features consistent with WHSUS, this report supports the conclusion that WHSUS should be considered in the differential diagnosis for patients with syndromic CDH.
35396629|a|
35396500|a|Atypical responses to sensory stimuli are considered as a core aspect and early life marker of autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Although recent findings performed in mouse ASD genetic models report sensory deficits, these were explored exclusively during juvenile or adult period. Whether sensory dysfunctions might be present at the early life stage and rescued by therapeutic strategy are fairly uninvestigated. Here we found that under cool environment neonatal mice lacking the autism-associated gene Magel2 present pup calls hypo-reactivity and are retrieved with delay by their wild-type dam. This neonatal atypical sensory reactivity to cool stimuli was not associated with autonomic thermoregulatory alteration but with a deficit of the oxytocinergic system. Indeed, we show in control neonates that pharmacogenetic inactivation of hypothalamic oxytocin neurons mimicked atypical thermosensory reactivity found in Magel2 mutants. Furthermore, pharmacological intranasal administration of oxytocin to Magel2 neonates was able to rescue both the atypical thermosensory response and the maternal pup retrieval. This preclinical study establishes for the first-time early life impairments in thermosensory integration and suggest a therapeutic potential benefit of intranasal oxytocin treatment on neonatal atypical sensory reactivity for autism.
35395866|a|BACKGROUND: Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS) is caused by haploinsufficiency of the SHANK3 gene and is characterized by global developmental delays and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Based on several converging lines of preclinical and clinical evidence supporting the use of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) in PMS, this study aims to follow-up a previous pilot study with IGF-1 to further evaluate this novel therapeutic for core symptoms of ASD in children with PMS. METHODS: Ten children aged 5-9 with PMS were enrolled. Participants were randomized to receive IGF-1 or placebo (saline) using a 12-week, double-blind, crossover design. Efficacy was assessed using the primary outcome of the Aberrant Behavior Checklist-Social Withdrawal (ABC-SW) subscale as well as secondary outcome measures reflecting core symptoms of ASD. To increase power and sample size, we jointly analyzed the effect of IGF-1 reported here together with results from our previous controlled trail of IGF-1 in children with PMS (combined N = 19). RESULTS: Results on the ABC-SW did not reach statistical significance, however significant improvements in sensory reactivity symptoms were observed. In our pooled analyses, IGF-1 treatment also led to significant improvements in repetitive behaviors and hyperactivity. There were no other statistically significant effects seen across other clinical outcome measures. IGF-1 was well tolerated and there were no serious adverse events. LIMITATIONS: The small sample size and expectancy bias due to relying on parent reported outcome measures may contribute to limitations in interpreting results. CONCLUSION: IGF-1 is efficacious in improving sensory reactivity symptoms, repetitive behaviors, and hyperactivity  in children with PMS. Trial registration NCT01525901.
35395591|a|PURPOSE: Accurate diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) plays a key role in improving the condition and quality of life for patients. In this study, we mainly focus on ASD diagnosis with functional brain networks (FBNs). The major challenge for brain networks modeling is the high dimensional connectivity in brain networks and limited number of subjects, which hinders the classification capability of graph convolutional networks (GCNs). METHOD: To alleviate the influence of the limited data and high dimensional connectivity, we introduce a unified three-stage graph learning framework for brain network classification, involving multi-graph clustering, graph generation and graph classification. The framework combining Graph Generation, Clustering and Classification Networks (GraphCGC-Net) enhances the critical connections by multi-graph clustering (MGC) with a supervision scheme, and generates realistic brain networks by simultaneously preserving the global consistent distribution and local topology properties. RESULTS: To demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, we evaluate the performance of the proposed method on the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE) dataset and conduct extensive experiments on the ASD classification problem. Our proposed method achieves an average accuracy of 70.45% and an AUC of 72.76% on ABIDE. Compared with the traditional GCN model, the proposed GraphCGC-Net obtains 9.3%, and 10.64% improvement in terms of accuracy and AUC metrics, respectively. CONCLUSION: The comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our GraphCGC-Net is effective for graph classification in brain disorders diagnosis. Moreover, we find that MGC can generate biologically meaningful subnetworks, which is highly consistent with the previous neuroimaging-derived biomarker evidence of ASD. More importantly, the promising results suggest that applying generative adversarial networks (GANs) in brain networks to improve the classification performance is worth further investigation.
35394818|a|PURPOSE: Parents of children on the autism spectrum enrolled in early intervention often receive coaching to address both social communication and disruptive behavior, which are the two most frequently reported concerns by parents. Intervention techniques for both are often recommended to be implemented across daily routines and require the parents to learn new ways of interacting with their child. A sequential approach to instructing parents in these key intervention targets may reduce burden and increase adherence. METHOD: This multiple-baseline design pilot study included three mother-child dyads who received instruction in a disruptive behavior intervention immediately following a social communication intervention. Maternal maintenance of social communication strategies and child disruptive behaviors were measured during probes throughout the study. RESULTS: Results indicate that although mothers readily learned to implement the techniques, fidelity of implementing social communication strategies declined after introduction of the positive behavior support strategies. CONCLUSIONS: A sequenced approach to parent-mediated intervention is feasible and acceptable. Clinical implications and future directions are discussed. SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL: https://doi.org/10.23641/asha.19528978.
35394438|a|BACKGROUND: Automated emotion classification could aid those who struggle to recognize emotions, including children with developmental behavioral conditions such as autism. However, most computer vision emotion recognition models are trained on adult emotion and therefore underperform when applied to child faces. OBJECTIVE: We designed a strategy to gamify the collection and labeling of child emotion-enriched images to boost the performance of automatic child emotion recognition models to a level closer to what will be needed for digital health care approaches. METHODS: We leveraged our prototype therapeutic smartphone game, GuessWhat, which was designed in large part for children with developmental and behavioral conditions, to gamify the secure collection of video data of children expressing a variety of emotions prompted by the game. Independently, we created a secure web interface to gamify the human labeling effort, called HollywoodSquares, tailored for use by any qualified labeler. We gathered and labeled 2155 videos, 39,968 emotion frames, and 106,001 labels on all images. With this drastically expanded pediatric emotion-centric database (>30 times larger than existing public pediatric emotion data sets), we trained a convolutional neural network (CNN) computer vision classifier of happy, sad, surprised, fearful, angry, disgust, and neutral expressions evoked by children. RESULTS: The classifier achieved a 66.9% balanced accuracy and 67.4% F1-score on the entirety of the Child Affective Facial Expression (CAFE) as well as a 79.1% balanced accuracy and 78% F1-score on CAFE Subset A, a subset containing at least 60% human agreement on emotions labels. This performance is at least 10% higher than all previously developed classifiers evaluated against CAFE, the best of which reached a 56% balanced accuracy even when combining "anger" and "disgust" into a single class. CONCLUSIONS: This work validates that mobile games designed for pediatric therapies can generate high volumes of domain-relevant data sets to train state-of-the-art classifiers to perform tasks helpful to precision health efforts.
35394425|a|Loss-of-function variants in SYNGAP1 cause a developmental encephalopathy defined by cognitive impairment, autistic features, and epilepsy. SYNGAP1 splicing leads to expression of distinct functional protein isoforms. Splicing imparts multiple cellular functions of SynGAP proteins through coding of distinct C-terminal motifs. However, it remains unknown how these different splice sequences function in vivo to regulate neuronal function and behavior. Reduced expression of SynGAP-a1/2 C-terminal splice variants in mice caused severe phenotypes, including reduced survival, impaired learning, and reduced seizure latency. In contrast, upregulation of a1/2 expression improved learning and increased seizure latency. Mice expressing a1-specific mutations, which disrupted SynGAP cellular functions without altering protein expression, promoted seizure, disrupted synapse plasticity, and impaired learning. These findings demonstrate that endogenous SynGAP isoforms with a1/2 spliced sequences promote cognitive function and impart seizure protection. Regulation of SynGAP-a expression or function may be a viable therapeutic strategy to broadly improve cognitive function and mitigate seizure.
35394243|a|This study examined alternative methods for detecting alexithymia to the Toronto Alexithymia Scale-20 (TAS-20) by comparing the emotional linguistic performance of ASD and NT samples (n = 32 in each) on the Alexithymia Provoked Responses Questionnaire (APRQ). We utilised both the LIWC and tidytext approaches to linguistic analysis. The results indicate the ASD sample used significantly fewer affective words in response to emotionally stimulating scenarios and had less emotional granularity. Affective word use was correlated with ASD symptomatology but not with TAS-20 scores, suggesting that some elements of alexithymia are not well detected by the TAS-20 alone. The APRQ, in combination with the tidytext package, offers significant potential for sophisticated exploration of emotional expression in ASD.
35393872|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Parents of Black autistic children use several strategies to cope with daily stressors. These strategies include seeking social support, self-care, and optimism. We asked parents about their experiences receiving treatment services for their autistic child and how they reduce parenting stress. Twenty-two parents completed a coping survey and participated in individual interviews. Few studies have explored the experiences of Black families raising autistic children, and it's important for healthcare and other systems of care to understand the role culture, race, and ethnicity play in the use of coping strategies. In our study, the majority of parents relied on social support to relieve stress and identified partners, family, and community members, as their most useful sources of support. Connecting with other parents of autistic children, through support groups and social media, also helped parents relieve stress. Parents discussed using self-care activities (e.g. church, exercising, listening to music) to cope with stressors. Several parents described how prayer and meditation helped them reframe stressful situations and gain more patience and appreciation for "what's important." The findings of this work demonstrate the need for professionals to have ongoing and deeper conversations about the ways in which parents deal with stressors. In particular, clinicians should leverage the strengths of Black families and promote strategies that are culturally informed and engaged.
35393403|a|Gene dosage disorders (GDDs) constitute a major class of genetic risks for psychopathology, but there is considerable debate regarding the extent to which different GDDs induce different psychopathology profiles. The current research speaks to this debate by compiling and analyzing dimensional measures of several autism-related traits (ARTs) across seven diverse GDDs. The sample included 350 individuals with one of 7 GDDs, as well as reference idiopathic autism spectrum disorder (ASD; n = 74) and typically developing control (TD; n = 171) groups. The GDDs were: Down, Williams-Beuren, and Smith-Magenis (DS, WS, SMS) syndromes, and varying sex chromosome aneuploidies ("plusX", "plusXX", "plusY", "plusXY"). The Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS-2) was used to measure ARTs at different levels of granularity-item, subscale, and total. General linear models were used to examine ART profiles in GDDs, and machine learning was used to predict genotype from SRS-2 subscales and items. These analyses were completed with and without covariation for cognitive impairment. Twelve of all possible 21 pairwise GDD group contrasts showed significantly different ART profiles (7/21 when co-varying for IQ, all Bonferroni-corrected). Prominent GDD-ART associations in post hoc analyses included relatively preserved social motivation in WS and relatively low levels of repetitive behaviors in plusX. Machine learning revealed that GDD group could be predicted with plausible accuracy (~60-80%) even after controlling for IQ. GDD effects on ARTs are influenced by GDD subtype and ART dimension. This observation has consequences for mechanistic, clinical, and translational aspects of psychiatric neurogenetics.
35393396|a|Previous research supports a contribution of early-life immune disturbances in the etiology of autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Biomarker studies of the maternal innate (non-adaptive) immune status related to ASD risk have focused on one of the acute phase proteins (APP), C-reactive protein (CRP), with conflicting results. We evaluated levels of eight different APP in first-trimester maternal serum samples, from 318 mothers to ASD cases and 429 mothers to ASD-unaffected controls, nested within the register-based Stockholm Youth Cohort. While no overall associations between high levels of APP and ASD were observed, associations varied across diagnostic sub-groups based on co-occurring conditions. Maternal levels of CRP in the lowest compared to the middle tertile were associated with increased risk of ASD without ID or ADHD in offspring (OR = 1.92, 95% CI 1.08-3.42). Further, levels of maternal ferritin in the lowest (OR = 1.78, 95% CI 1.18-2.69) and highest (OR = 1.64, 95% CI 1.11-2.43) tertiles were associated with increased risk of any ASD diagnosis in offspring, with stronger associations still between the lowest (OR = 3.81, 95% CI 1.91-7.58) and highest (OR = 3.36, 95% CI 1.73-6.53) tertiles of ferritin and risk of ASD with ID. The biological interpretation of lower CRP levels among mothers to ASD cases is not clear but might be related to the function of the maternal innate immune system. The finding of aberrant levels of ferritin conferring risk of ASD-phenotypes indicates a plausibly important role of iron during neurodevelopment.
35392682|a|
35392274|a|Aim: De novo DDX3X variants account for 1-3% of unexplained intellectual disability cases in females and very rarely in males. Yet, the clinical and genetic features of DDX3X neurodevelopmental disorder in the Chinese cohort have not been characterized. Method: A total of 23 Chinese patients (i.e., 22 female and 1 male) with 22 de novo DDX3X deleterious variants were detected among 2,317 probands with unexplained intellectual disability (ID) undertaking whole exome sequencing (WES). The age, sex, genetic data, feeding situation, growth, developmental conditions, and auxiliary examinations of the cohort were collected. The Chinese version of the Gesell Development Diagnosis Scale (GDDS-C) was used to evaluate neurodevelopment of DDX3X patients. The Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ)-Lifetime version was applied as a primary screener to assess risk for autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Result: A total of 17 DDX3X variants were novel and 22 were de novo. Missense variants overall were only slightly more common than loss-of-function variants and were mainly located in two functional subdomains. The average age of this cohort was 2.67 (+-1.42) years old. The overlapping phenotypic spectrum between this cohort and previously described reports includes intellectual disability (23/23, 100%) with varying degrees of severity, muscle tone abnormalities (17/23, 73.9%), feeding difficulties (13/23, 56.5%), ophthalmologic problems (11/23, 47.8%), and seizures (6/23, 26.1%). A total of 15 individuals had notable brain anatomical disruption (15/23, 65.2%), including lateral ventricle enlargement, corpus callosum abnormalities, and delayed myelination. Furthermore, 9 patients showed abnormal electroencephalogram results (9/23, 39.1%). Hypothyroidism was first noted as a novel clinical feature (6/23, 26.1%). The five primary neurodevelopmental domains of GDDS-C in 21 patients were impaired severely, and 13 individuals were above the "at-risk" threshold for ASD. Interpretation: Although a certain degree of phenotypic overlap with previously reported cohorts, our study described the phenotypic and variation spectrum of 23 additional individuals carrying DDX3X variants in the Chinese population, adding hypothyroidism as a novel finding. We confirmed the importance of DDX3X as a pathogenic gene in unexplained intellectual disability, supporting the necessity of the application of WES in patients with unexplained intellectual disability.
35391629|a|In the current study, we describe a study of the Internet-based Parent-implemented Communication Strategies-Storybook (i-PiCSS). I-PiCSS is an intervention program designed to train and coach parents to use evidence-based naturalistic communication teaching (NCT) strategies (i.e., modeling, mand-model, and time delay) and reading techniques while reading storybooks with their young children with disabilities. Three participating parents were trained via online modules and coached via telepractice technologies (videoconferences). Zoom videoconference software was used for all coaching sessions. Using a single case multiple-baseline design across NCT strategies within each family, we examined, (a) parents' fidelity use of the three NCT strategies, (b) parents' use of book reading techniques, and (c) child language and communication outcomes. After self-directed training and remote coaching, parents used modeling, mand-model, and time delay strategies with higher rates and fidelity (accuracy). Children initiated more communicative acts upon parents' use of time delay and increased their numbers of single-and multiple-word responses.
35389757|a|PURPOSE: School staff who work with autistic students are at a high risk of exhaustion. More training and guidance are needed to enable them to respond to these students' needs. The purpose of this study was to design and evaluate a professional development program offered by an occupational therapist to help a team of school staff facilitate the participation of autistic students and their peers. METHODS: A design-based research approach guided the development and evaluation of the modalities of the program. A case study was conducted in a school with nine school staff members using individual interviews, questionnaires, and a logbook. RESULTS: The program comprised five modalities: regular presence of the occupational therapist, a needs analysis, content focused on the features of an inclusive school, individual coaching, and team coaching. The following elements emerged as particularly helpful for the participants: frequent interactions with the occupational therapist, opportunities to collaborate, personalized support, experimentation of new practices with the occupational therapist, and concrete training content that can benefit all students. CONCLUSION: The modalities of the program appear promising to help a school team facilitate the participation of all students, including those who are autistic.Implications for rehabilitationOccupational therapists can help school teams to facilitate the participation of autistic students and their peers.A combination of individual and team coaching sessions appears promising in helping school staff adopt practice changes to make their school more inclusive.Using a multi-tiered approach can help therapists collaborate with school staff members to first find solutions that will be applicable with all of their students.
35389185|a|Previous studies have demonstrated abnormal brain overgrowth in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), but the development of specific brain regions, such as the amygdala and hippocampal subfields in infants, is incompletely documented. To address this issue, we performed the first MRI study of amygdala and hippocampal subfields in infants from 6 to 24 months of age using a longitudinal dataset. A novel deep learning approach, Dilated-Dense U-Net, was proposed to address the challenge of low tissue contrast and small structural size of these subfields. We performed a volume-based analysis on the segmentation results. Our results show that infants who were later diagnosed with ASD had larger left and right volumes of amygdala and hippocampal subfields than typically developing controls.
35388991|a|In the present study, we provide a preliminary evaluation of the validity and reliability of using weighting procedures to measure communication in play samples for preschool-aged boys with autism or fragile X syndrome (FXS). Because weighting procedure communication scores (WPCSs) reflect growth in both communicative frequency and complexity, establishing the psychometrics of the component scores, in addition to the overall metric, affords investigators the opportunity to describe growth within and across skills. Results, for both groups, provide support regarding the psychometric appropriateness (i.e., convergent validity, divergent validity, and internal consistency) for all WPCSs. That said, a trend was observed for reliability scores to be slightly lower or more variable in boys with autism than in boys with FXS. Finally, although significant associations were observed in the associations between WPCSs across play contexts, contexts effects were observed for all three WPCSs. Together, results from this study provide promising preliminary data indicating the utility of using WPCSs in children with neurodevelopmental disabilities. Lay Summary: Language supports long-term positive outcomes; it is important to identify accurate and flexible ways of measuring language in children over time. We considered the effectiveness of using a procedure that considers changes in the number of communication acts and the types of acts produced during a play session by preschool-aged boys with autism or fragile X syndrome. These procedures were found to be valid and reliable.
35388780|a|BACKGROUND: A variety of information sources are used in the best-evidence diagnostic procedure in child and adolescent mental healthcare, including evaluation by referrers and structured assessment questionnaires for parents. However, the incremental value of these information sources is still poorly examined. AIMS: To quantify the added and unique predictive value of referral letters, screening, multi-informant assessment and clinicians' remote evaluations in predicting mental health disorders. METHOD: Routine medical record data on 1259 referred children and adolescents were retrospectively extracted. Their referral letters, responses to the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ), results on closed-ended questions from the Development and Well-Being Assessment (DAWBA) and its clinician-rated version were linked to classifications made after face-to-face intake in psychiatry. Following multiple imputations of missing data, logistic regression analyses were performed with the above four nodes of assessment as predictors and the five childhood disorders common in mental healthcare (anxiety, depression, autism spectrum disorders, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, behavioural disorders) as outcomes. Likelihood ratio tests and diagnostic odds ratios were computed. RESULTS: Each assessment tool significantly predicted the classified outcome. Successive addition of the assessment instruments improved the prediction models, with the exception of behavioural disorder prediction by the clinician-rated DAWBA. With the exception of the SDQ for depressive and behavioural disorders, all instruments showed unique predictive value. CONCLUSIONS: Structured acquisition and integrated use of diverse sources of information supports evidence-based diagnosis in clinical practice. The clinical value of structured assessment at the primary-secondary care interface should now be quantified in prospective studies.
35388771|a|BACKGROUND: There is some evidence that autism spectrum disorder (ASD) frequently co-occurs with immune-mediated conditions including asthma. We aimed to explore the familial co-aggregation of ASD and asthma using different genetically informed designs. METHODS: We first examined familial co-aggregation of asthma and ASD in individuals born in Sweden from 1992 to 2007 (n = 1 569 944), including their full- and half-siblings (n = 1 704 388 and 356 544 pairs) and full cousins (n = 3 921 890 pairs), identified using Swedish register data. We then applied quantitative genetic modeling to siblings (n = 620 994 pairs) and twins who participated in the Child and Adolescent Twin Study in Sweden (n = 15 963 pairs) to estimate the contribution of genetic and environmental factors to the co-aggregation. Finally, we estimated genetic correlations between traits using linkage disequilibrium score regression (LDSC). RESULTS: We observed a within-individual association [adjusted odds ratio (OR) 1.33, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.28-1.37] and familial co-aggregation between asthma and ASD, and the magnitude of the associations decreased as the degree of relatedness decreased (full-siblings: OR 1.44, 95% CI 1.38-1.50, maternal half-siblings: OR 1.28, 95% CI 1.18-1.39, paternal half-siblings: OR 1.05, 95% CI 0.96-1.15, full cousins: OR 1.06, 95% CI 1.03-1.09), suggesting shared familial liability. Quantitative genetic models estimated statistically significant genetic correlations between ASD traits and asthma. Using the LDSC approach, we did not find statistically significant genetic correlations between asthma and ASD (coefficients between -0.09 and 0.12). CONCLUSIONS: Using different genetically informed designs, we found some evidence of familial co-aggregation between asthma and ASD, suggesting the weak association between these disorders was influenced by shared genetics.
35388530|a|OBJECTIVE: Previous literature shows an increased risk for eating disorders in autistic individuals. This study tested whether fussy eating contributes to the association between childhood autistic traits and adolescent eating disorder behaviours. METHOD: Using data from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children, we estimated the intercept and slope of parent-rated autistic traits and fussy eating between 7 and 14 years (N = 8982) and their association with self-reported eating disorder behaviours at age 14 years, including the indirect path from autistic traits to eating disorder behaviours via fussy eating. Analyses were adjusted for child sex, maternal age at delivery, maternal body mass index and maternal education. RESULTS: Analyses found a small indirect pathway from autistic traits intercept to eating disorder behaviours via fussy eating slope (b = 0.017, 95% CI = 0.002-0.032, p = 0.026), with higher levels of autistic traits at age 7 years being associated with a shallower decline in fussy eating, which in turn was associated with greater eating disorder behaviours. CONCLUSION: Findings point towards fussy eating as a potential link between childhood autistic traits and later disordered eating. Addressing fussy eating patterns before they become entrenched may decrease risk for eating disorders later in development.
35388493|a|Recent research has developed methods of assessing the function of generic, nonindividualized social interactions. The purpose of this type of assessment is to provide a measure of how an individual may respond to the types of interactions readily available in the natural environment. To date, no research has evaluated how the social time allocation of individuals for whom generic interactions are neutral or aversive could be improved. Moreover, no research has included additional dependent variables that may be functionally related to social time allocation. In the current study, we evaluated the effects of initiating preferred, individualized social interactions on the social time allocation of 3 participants for whom generic interactions functioned as neutral or aversive stimuli. The intervention increased social time allocation for all 3 participants. Next, we evaluated the relation between social time allocation and the occurrence of mands, item engagement, and rigid or repetitive behavior using the intervention data as well as secondary analyses of previously published datasets. The occurrence of mands and rigid or repetitive behaviors changed with improvements in social time allocation and were strongly correlated with social time allocation across participants. Implications for future research on, and the clinical use of, this type of assessment and intervention are discussed.
35388450|a|OBJECTIVE: Taking care of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), as of children with other developmental disorders, is associated with greater parental stress. The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence and impact of integrative and co-morbid ASD-related symptoms on parental stress levels during the COVID-19 pandemic at four time points. Testing was performed during significant changes related to the state of the COVID-19 pandemic in Serbia. METHODS: The research sample included 67 parents of children with ASD 4 to 7 years and 6 months of age. The Autism Parenting Stress Index, Gilliam Autism Rating Scale - Third Edition, diagnostic criteria for ASD from DSM-5 and Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence - Fourth Edition were used to assess the tested abilities. RESULTS: Core behavior (problems of social development and communication skills) as well as co-morbid behaviors related to ASD (tantrums, aggressive behavior, self-injurious behavior and difficulties with transitions) caused the highest degree of parental stress. Post hoc tests that used Bonferroni correction found that parental stress caused by basic and co-morbid behaviors gradually decreased from first to fourth measurement, respectively. Sleep and toilet training problems, as well as co-morbid physical problems, caused the greatest degree of parental stress during the first measurement. Measuring total parental stress caused by integrative and co-morbid symptoms related to ASD showed that it was at the highest level during the first measurement, decreased during the second measurement and remained unchanged during the third and fourth measurements. CONCLUSION: Time, as a repeating factor, during the COVID-19 pandemic has an effect on lowering the levels of parental stress caused by all examined ASD-related domains. These results may be useful in creating individual programs to support parents of children with ASD during the COVID-19 pandemic.
35388325|a|So far, the biomedical community has not provided clear etiological conclusions and targeted drug treatments. Educational intervention and rehabilitation are the main ways to promote the development of autistic children's ability and change the quality of life. This research mainly explores how intelligent somatosensory interactive activities can restore motor function to children with autism. Case studies are used to investigate the current problems of hand movement training for children with autism and the effect of somatosensory games on rehabilitation training for autism. The experience of autistic children using somatosensory games for hand movement training was analyzed. Through the collection, sorting, and analysis of data, the influence of different factors on users' immersive experience is explored. It designs and implements the system's somatosensory game module, including a detailed introduction to the development platform and key technologies used in the development of the somatosensory game module, and shows the functions, program flow, main features, and implementation effects of the somatosensory game. The development process of the somatosensory interaction system is introduced in detail, including model making, character control, task flow control, collision detection, interactive interface, and natural interaction methods of gesture interaction and voice interaction. This study outlines the concepts related to autism and the characteristics of children with autism. It discusses the feasibility of applying somatosensory games to the hand movement training of children with autism and analyzes the development status and application of somatosensory games in detail to lay the foundation for follow-up research. Moreover, it defines the research content of somatosensory interactive training products and clarifies the design content and direction of the product. The comfort evaluation of the somatosensory game products designed in the study reached 92.9%. This research further proves that somatosensory games have a positive effect.
35388223|a|Over the past few decades, neuroimaging has become a ubiquitous tool in basic research and clinical studies of the human brain. However, no reference standards currently exist to quantify individual differences in neuroimaging metrics over time, in contrast to growth charts for anthropometric traits such as height and weight1. Here we assemble an interactive open resource to benchmark brain morphology derived from any current or future sample of MRI data ( http://www.brainchart.io/ ). With the goal of basing these reference charts on the largest and most inclusive dataset available, acknowledging limitations due to known biases of MRI studies relative to the diversity of the global population, we aggregated 123,984 MRI scans, across more than 100 primary studies, from 101,457 human participants between 115 days post-conception to 100 years of age. MRI metrics were quantified by centile scores, relative to non-linear trajectories2 of brain structural changes, and rates of change, over the lifespan. Brain charts identified previously unreported neurodevelopmental milestones3, showed high stability of individuals across longitudinal assessments, and demonstrated robustness to technical and methodological differences between primary studies. Centile scores showed increased heritability compared with non-centiled MRI phenotypes, and provided a standardized measure of atypical brain structure that revealed patterns of neuroanatomical variation across neurological and psychiatric disorders. In summary, brain charts are an essential step towards robust quantification of individual variation benchmarked to normative trajectories in multiple, commonly used neuroimaging phenotypes.
35388181|a|The genetic etiology and underlying mechanism of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) remain elusive. SHANK family genes (SHANK1/2/3) are well known ASD-related genes. However, little is known about how SHANK missense mutations contribute to ASD. Here, we aimed to clarify the molecular mechanism of and the multilevel neuropathological features induced by Shank1 mutations in knock-in (KI) mice. In this study, by sequencing the SHANK1 gene in a cohort of 615 ASD patients and 503 controls, we identified an ASD-specific recurrent missense mutation, c.2621 G > A (p.R874H). This mutation demonstrated strong pathogenic potential in in vitro experiments, and we generated the corresponding Shank1 R882H-KI mice. Shank1 R882H-KI mice displayed core symptoms of ASD, namely, social disability and repetitive behaviors, without confounding comorbidities of abnormal motor function and heightened anxiety. Brain structural changes in the frontal cortex, hippocampus and cerebellar cortex were observed in Shank1 R882H-KI mice via structural magnetic resonance imaging. These key brain regions also showed severe and consistent downregulation of mGluR1-IP3R1-calcium signaling, which subsequently affected the release of intracellular calcium. Corresponding cellular structural and functional changes were present in Shank1 R882H-KI mice, including decreased spine size, reduced spine density, abnormal morphology of postsynaptic densities, and impaired hippocampal long-term potentiation and basal excitatory transmission. These findings demonstrate the causative role of SHANK1 in ASD and elucidate the underlying biological mechanism of core symptoms of ASD. We also provide a reliable model of ASD with core symptoms for future studies, such as biomarker identification and therapeutic intervention studies.
35387850|a|Narcolepsy type 1 is a central disorder of hypersomnolence characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness, cataplexy (i.e., sudden loss of muscle tone during wakefulness triggered by emotions), and rapid eye movement sleep-related manifestations that can present with a peculiar phenotype when arising at a pediatric age. Several features of childhood-onset narcolepsy type 1 are also common in neuropsychiatric conditions; discrete neuropsychiatric comorbidity has also been demonstrated.Here we report on three children with very early narcolepsy type 1. All three patients had psychiatric features at time of symptom onset coupled with peculiar motor disturbances. The course of narcolepsy symptoms also paralleled neuropsychiatric symptoms, suggesting a possible intrinsic link between sleep and psychological features.Multidisciplinary management is mandatory for pediatric narcolepsy type 1 since prompt disease management addressing neuropsychiatric symptoms could lead to better clinical outcomes and quality of life.
35387206|a|Background: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental disorder characterized by social behavior deficits and stereotyped behaviors in childhood that lacks satisfactory medical intervention. Early swimming intervention is a noninvasive method combining enriched environment and exercise, which has been proven to improve brain development in young children and to treat neurodevelopmental diseases. Methods: In this study, we tested the autism-like behavior of rats with deletions in exons 11-21 of the Shank3 gene and evaluated the effect of early swimming intervention (from postnatal day 8 to 60) on the behavior of this animal model of autism. In addition, the transcriptomes of the striatal tissues of wild-type, Shank3 knockout and Shank3 knockout swimming groups rats were analyzed. Results: Shank3 knockout rats exhibit core symptoms of autism, and early swimming improved the social and stereotyped behaviors in this autism rat model. Transcriptomics results revealed that compared to the wild-type group, 291 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in the striatum of the Shank3 knockout group. Compared to Shank3 knockout group, 534 DEGs were identified in the striatum of Shank3 knockout swimming group. The DEGs annotated by Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway shows that the impacts of Shank3 deletion were primarily reflected in synaptic structure, development, morphology, receptor function and signaling, and swimming primarily changed the terms related to the synapses in the striatum of Shank3 knockout rats, including the morphology, structure, composition, development and regulation of synapses. Conclusion: Early swimming intervention can ameliorate behavioral abnormalities caused by Shank3 knockout, by a mechanism that may involve the process of striatal synaptic development and should be further investigated.
35386528|a|This study sought to examine how certain variables of autistic youth who completed a formal social intervention program (PEERS) predicted social skill improvement post intervention. Specifically, this research aimed to determine if age, gender, emotional intelligence, intellectual ability, and/or autism symptomatology predicted social skill outcomes. Using extant data from parent and self-report batteries, change scores and multiple regressions were employed to examine which variables accounted for social skill improvement. Only intellectual ability (FSIQ), specifically perceptual reasoning, significantly predicted social skill outcomes based upon teen self-report, suggesting that autistic youth with specific cognitive profiles may be benefit more from PEERS. This research also exemplifies the heterogeneous nature of autism symptomology and the continued need for research examining social skill interventions. Limitations and future directions are discussed.
35386524|a|Impaired social-emotional reciprocity is a defining feature of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Deficits in reciprocity can be difficult to assess, particularly in adults with average or above average intelligence. The recently developed Interactive Drawing Test (IDT) measures reciprocity in children and adolescents with and without ASD based on spontaneous non-verbal interactions during the joint creation of a drawing. In this study, we examined if the IDT is able to differentiate between 19 normally intelligent adults with ASD and 18 without ASD. The IDT total reciprocity score, including the number of meaningful contributions to objects initially drawn by the examiner, was lower in the autistic adults compared to those without ASD. By assessing both the quantity and quality of spontaneous reciprocal behavior, the IDT was able to identify subtle differences in reciprocal behavior of adults with and without ASD with average intelligence. Even though a larger sample is required to determine its psychometric properties, the IDT appears a promising tool to enrich the diagnostic process of ASD in adults. Impaired social-emotional reciprocity is a defining feature of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). The clinical field lacks sensitive tests for assessing impaired reciprocity. The recently developed Interactive Drawing Test (IDT) for reciprocity was tested in autistic and non-autistic adults. During the IDT, an examiner and participant make a joint drawing, taking turns, without specifying what they will draw. We aimed to investigated whether autistic adults showed less reciprocal behavior on the IDT compared to non-autistic participants. Autistic participants were less likely to jointly draw with the examiner, in particular when the examiner initiated a topic. The IDT revealed subtle but characteristic differences in reciprocal behavior related to ASD, suggesting it may be a promising diagnostic tool.
35386472|a|Introduction: The Down syndrome population has a high prevalence for dementia, often showing their first clinical symptoms in their 40s. Methods: In a longitudinal cohort, we investigate whether amyloid deposition at time point 1 (TP1) could predict cortical thickness change at time point 2 (TP2). The association between tau burden and cortical thickness was also examined at time point 3 (TP3). Results: Between TP1 and TP2 there was pronounced cortical thinning in temporo-parietal cortices and cortical thickening in the frontal cortex. Baseline amyloid burden was strongly associated to cortical thinning progression, especially in the temporo-parietal regions. At TP3, tau deposition negatively correlated with cortical atrophy in regions where tau usually accumulates at later Braak stages. Discussion: A higher amount of amyloid accumulation triggers a cascade of changes of disease-causing processes that eventually lead to dementia. As expected, we found that regions where tau usually accumulates were those also displaying high levels of cortical atrophy.
35386198|a|Background: The chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 2 (CHD2) gene, is an ATPase and part of the CHD family of chromatin remodelers. Mutations in the CHD2 gene are inherited in an autosomal-dominant manner and can lead to intellectual disability, epilepsy, and autism. We investigated the clinical characteristics of CHD2-related conditions and their possible pathogenesis. Methods: We collected and analysed the clinical data of patients that were identified as having CHD2 mutations. Genetic testing was performed using targeted sequencing or whole-exome sequencing. We analysed the expression of CHD2 and repressor element 1-silencing transcription factor (REST) in blood samples using quantitative PCR and the conservation of the mutations. The CHD2 mutations we identified were compared with the known mutations reported in the CHD2-related literature. Results: Eight patients with CHD2 gene mutations were analysed. Six mutations were identified; four were unreported previously (c.670C>T; c.4012A>C; c.2416dup; c.1727-1728insAT), and two were known mutations: c.5035C>T (two cases) and c.4173dup (two cases). Among these mutations, seven were de novo mutations, and one could not be determined because the parents refused genetic testing. The clinical manifestations included mild or severe intellectual disability, epilepsy, and behavioural abnormalities. Quantitative PCR showed that the CHD2 gene expression levels among the patients, parents, and the controls were not significantly different. The levels of REST gene expression in the patients were significantly higher than those of the controls; thus, mutation of the CHD2 gene led to an increase in the expression level of the REST gene. The mutations reported were all located in conserved positions in different species. Among the various medications administered for treatment, valproate showed the best results for the treatment of epilepsy caused by CHD2 gene mutation. Conclusion: Mutation in CHD2 did not lead to a significant decrease in its expression level, indicating that the clinical phenotype was unrelated to its expression level, and the mutant protein may retain some function. Most of the mutations relatively stable. In addition, the clinical manifestations from the same mutation in the CHD2 gene were different among the known cases; this may be related to the regulation of REST or other regulatory factors.
35386062|a|Past studies indicate that many autistic youth benefit from support with developing social relationships, exploring leadership opportunities, and engaging in post-secondary education. Teens Engaged as Mentors (TEAM) is an innovative mentoring program that provides socialization and community engagement opportunities in a safe environment for youth with and without autism. This qualitative study explored how participants and their caregivers perceived participation in TEAM. Stakeholder focus groups were conducted annually from 2016 to 2020 with 16 autistic mentees (ages 9-13), 30 autistic and neurotypical mentors (ages 14-21), and 30 caregivers. Participants reported enjoying TEAM because of increased socialization opportunities, which promoted friendships and openness toward others. Caregivers reported growth in their children's social skills and confidence throughout their participation.
35385942|a|Objective: To summarize the phenotypes of epilepsy in patients with MBD5 gene variants. Methods: A total of 9 epileptic patients, who were treated in the Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital from July 2016 to September 2021 and detected with MBD5 gene pathogenic variants, were enrolled. The features of clinical manifestations, electroencephalogram (EEG), and neuroimaging were analyzed retrospectively. Results: Among 9 patients, 6 were male and 3 were female. Age at seizure onset ranged from 5 to 89 months. Multiple seizure types were observed, including generalized tonic clonic seizures (GTCS) in 7 patients, myoclonic seizures in 5 patients, focal seizures in 5 patients, atypical absence seizures in 3 patients, atonic seizures in 2 patients, myoclonus absence seizures in 1 patient, epileptic spasms in 1 patient, and tonic seizures in 1 patient. There were 8 patients with multiple seizure types, 2 patients with sensitivity to fever and 5 patients with clustering of seizures. Two patients had a history of status epilepticus. All patients had developmental delay before seizure onset. Nine patients had obvious language delay, and 6 patients had autism-like manifestations. Five patients had slow background activity in EEG. Interictal EEG showed abnormal discharges in 9 patients. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was normal in all patients. A total of 9 epileptic patients carried MBD5 gene variants, all of them were de novo variants. There were MBD5 gene overall heterozygous deletion in 1 patient, large fragment deletions including MBD5 gene in 3 patients and single nucleotide variations (c.300C>A/p.C100X, c.1775delA/p.N592Tfs*29, c.1759C>T/p.Q587X, c.150_151del/p.Lys51Asnfs*6, c.113+1G>C) in 5 patients. The age at last follow-up ranged from 2 years and 9 months to 11 years and 11 months. At the last follow-up, 2 patients were seizure-free for more than 11 months to 4 years 6 months, 7 patients still had seizures. Conclusions: The initial seizure onset in patients with MBD5 gene variants usually occurs in infancy. Most patients have multiple seizure types. The seizures may be fever sensitive and clustered. Developmental delays, language impairments, and autistic behaviors are common. MBD5 gene variants include single nucleotide variations and fragment deletions. Epilepsy associated with MBD5 gene variants is usually refractory.
35385887|a|BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Several studies have indicated an association between maternal prenatal substance use and offspring externalizing disorders; however, it is uncertain whether this relationship is causal. We conducted a systematic review to determine: (1) if the literature supports a causal role of maternal prenatal substance use on offspring externalizing disorders diagnosis and (2) whether these associations differ across externalizing disorders. METHODS: We searched Web of Science, Embase, PsycINFO and Medline databases. Risk of bias assessment was conducted using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS), and where possible meta-analysis was conducted for studies classed as low risk of bias. We included studies of any design that examined prenatal smoking, alcohol or caffeine use. Studies in non-English language, fetal alcohol syndrome and comorbid autism spectrum disorders were excluded. Participants in the included studies were mothers and their offspring. Measurements included prenatal smoking, alcohol or caffeine use as an exposure, and diagnosis of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), conduct disorder (CD) and oppositional defiant disorder (ODD) in offspring as an outcome. RESULTS: We included 63 studies, 46 of which investigated smoking and ADHD. All studies were narratively synthesized, and seven studies on smoking and ADHD were meta-analysed. The largest meta-analysis based on genetically sensitive design included 1 011 546 participants and did not find evidence for an association [odds ratio (OR)1-9 cigarettes  = 0.90, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.83-1.11; OR > 10 cigarettes  = 1.04, 95% CI = 0.79-1.36). Studies on alcohol exposure in all the outcomes reported inconsistent findings and no strong conclusions on causality can be made. Studies on caffeine exposure were mainly limited to ADHD and these studies do not support a causal effect. CONCLUSIONS: There appears to be no clear evidence to support a causal relationship between maternal prenatal smoking and offspring attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Findings with alcohol and caffeine exposures and conduct disorder and oppositional-defiant disorder need more research, using more genetically sensitive designs.
35385734|a|Mutations in the chromodomain helicase DNA-binding 8 (CHD8) gene are a frequent cause of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). While its phenotypic spectrum often encompasses macrocephaly, implicating cortical abnormalities, how CHD8 haploinsufficiency affects neurodevelopmental is unclear. Here, employing human cerebral organoids, we find that CHD8 haploinsufficiency disrupted neurodevelopmental trajectories with an accelerated and delayed generation of, respectively, inhibitory and excitatory neurons that yields, at days 60 and 120, symmetrically opposite expansions in their proportions. This imbalance is consistent with an enlargement of cerebral organoids as an in vitro correlate of patients' macrocephaly. Through an isogenic design of patient-specific mutations and mosaic organoids, we define genotype-phenotype relationships and uncover their cell-autonomous nature. Our results define cell-type-specific CHD8-dependent molecular defects related to an abnormal program of proliferation and alternative splicing. By identifying cell-type-specific effects of CHD8 mutations, our study uncovers reproducible developmental alterations that may be employed for neurodevelopmental disease modeling.
35385725|a|Mutation or disruption of the Shank/ProSAP family of genes is a high risk factor for autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) and intellectual disability. N-methyl-D-aspartate glutamate receptor (NMDAR) dysfunction contributes to the development of autism-like behaviors. However, the molecular mechanism of Shank-mediated NMDAR modulation is still not clear. Here, we show that the scaffold protein plenty of SH3s (POSH) directly interacts with two other scaffold proteins, PSD95 and SHANK2/3, at excitatory synapses. In POSH conditional knockout (cKO) mice, normal synaptic clustering of NMDAR/PSD-95/SHANK complex is disrupted, accompanied by abnormal dendritic spine development and glutamatergic transmission in hippocampal neurons. POSH cKO mice display profound autism-like behaviors, including impairments in social interactions, social communication, repetitive behaviors, and deficits in learning and memory. Thus, POSH clusters at the postsynaptic density (PSD) with PSD-95 and SHANK2/3 and plays important roles in the signaling mechanisms of the NMDAR/PSD-95/POSH/SHANK complex as well as in spine development and brain function.
35385462|a|
35385430|a|OBJECTIVE: Causative variants in SETD1B, encoding a lysine-specific methyltransferase, have recently been associated with a neurodevelopmental phenotype encompassing intellectual disability, autistic features, pronounced language delay, and epilepsy. It has been noted that long-term and deep phenotype data are needed to further delineate this rare condition. METHODS: In this study, we provide an in-depth clinical characterization with long-term follow-up and trio exome sequencing findings to describe one additional individual affected by SETD1B-related disorder. The diagnostic workup was complemented by a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study. RESULTS: We report a 24-year-old male individual with an early-onset neurodevelopmental disorder with epilepsy due to the de novo missense variant c.5699A>G, p.(Tyr1900Cys) in SETD1B (NM_015048.1). He exhibited delayed speech development, autism spectrum disorder, and early-onset epilepsy with absence and generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Despite profoundly impaired communication skills, ongoing improvements regarding language production have been noted in adulthood. fMRI findings demonstrate abnormal language activation and resting-state connectivity structure. CONCLUSION: Our report expands the previously delineated phenotype of SETD1B-related disorder and provides novel insights into underlying disease mechanisms.
35385224|a|Machine learning (ML) approaches show increasing promise in their ability to identify vocal markers of autism. Nonetheless, it is unclear to what extent such markers generalize to new speech samples collected, for example, using a different speech task or in a different language. In this paper, we systematically assess the generalizability of ML findings across a variety of contexts. We train promising published ML models of vocal markers of autism on novel cross-linguistic datasets following a rigorous pipeline to minimize overfitting, including cross-validated training and ensemble models. We test the generalizability of the models by testing them on (i) different participants from the same study, performing the same task; (ii) the same participants, performing a different (but similar) task; (iii) a different study with participants speaking a different language, performing the same type of task. While model performance is similar to previously published findings when trained and tested on data from the same study (out-of-sample performance), there is considerable variance between studies. Crucially, the models do not generalize well to different, though similar, tasks and not at all to new languages. The ML pipeline is openly shared. Generalizability of ML models of vocal markers of autism is an issue. We outline three recommendations for strategies researchers could take to be more explicit about generalizability and improve it in future studies. LAY SUMMARY: Machine learning approaches promise to be able to identify autism from voice only. These models underestimate how diverse the contexts in which we speak are, how diverse the languages used are and how diverse autistic voices are. Machine learning approaches need to be more careful in defining their limits and generalizability.
35385218|a|Action prediction involves observing and predicting the actions of others and plays an important role in social cognition and interacting with others. It is thought to use simulation, whereby the observers use their own motor system to predict the observed actions. As individuals diagnosed with autism are characterized by difficulties understanding the actions of others and motor coordination issues, it is possible that action prediction ability is altered in this population. This study compared action prediction ability between 20 autistic and 22 non-autistic adults using an occlusion paradigm. Participants watched different videos of a female actor carrying out everyday actions. During each video, the action was transiently occluded by a gray rectangle for 1000 ms. During occlusions, the video was allowed to continue as normal or was moved forward (i.e., appearing to continue too far ahead) or moved backwards (i.e., appearing to continue too far behind). Participants were asked to indicate after each occlusion whether the action continued with the correct timing or was too far ahead/behind. Autistic individuals were less accurate than non-autistic individuals, particularly when the video was too far behind. A trend analysis suggested that autistic participants were more likely to judge too far behind occlusions as being in time. These preliminary results suggest that prediction ability may be altered in autistic adults, potentially due to slower simulation or a delayed onset of these processes. LAY SUMMARY: When we observe other people performing everyday actions, we use their movements to help us understand and predict what they are doing. In this study, we found that autistic compared to non-autistic adults were slightly less accurate at predicting other people's actions. These findings help to unpick the different ways that social understanding is affected in autism.
35385092|a|
35384780|a|BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Mutations in KCNQ3 have classically been associated with benign familial neonatal and infantile seizures and more recently identified in patients with neurodevelopmental disorders and abnormal electroencephalogram (EEG) findings. We present 4 affected patients from a family with a pathogenic mutation in KCNQ3 with a unique constellation of clinical findings. METHODS: A family of 3 affected siblings and mother sharing a KCNQ3 pathogenic variant are described, including clinical history, genetic results, and EEG and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings. RESULTS: This family shows a variety of clinical manifestations, including neonatal seizures, developmental delays, autism spectrum disorder, and anxiety. One child developed absence epilepsy, 2 children have infrequent convulsive seizures that have persisted into childhood, and their parent developed adult-onset epilepsy. An underlying c.1091G>A (R364H) variant in KCNQ3 was found in all affected individuals. CONCLUSIONS: The phenotypic variability of KCNQ3 channelopathies continues to expand as more individuals and families are described, and the variant identified in this family adds to the understanding of the manifestations of KCNQ3-related disorders.
35384753|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Eye Movement Desensitisation and Reprocessing (EMDR) is a psychological therapy that can help people process memories and distress about past events, so they have less impact on their daily lives. EMDR can be effective for treating symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder, including nightmares and anxiety. Psychological therapies usually require adaptation so they are more accessible and effective for autistic people, but minimal research has focused on how best EMDR can be adapted. In this online survey study, we asked 103 EMDR therapists about barriers they think autistic people face when trying to have EMDR and what adaptations they use in their everyday practice. Four barriers were highlighted: client-related characteristics, therapist-related characteristics, differences in the therapeutic relationship and broader issues. Therapists identified a range of adaptations that can potentially be useful for autistic people, relating to being flexible, communicating clearly and having an awareness of individual differences. Many therapists emphasised the importance of not making assumptions about a person based on their autism diagnosis. Overall, the study findings suggest adaptations to EMDR are likely to be useful, but how relevant they are depends on each person.
35384703|a|Background: The aim of this study was to evaluate the long-term effects of lithium treatment on white blood cell (WBC) count, serum creatinine, and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels in children and adolescents with bipolar disorder (BD) and non-BD in a Turkish children and adolescent sample. Methods: The study is based on retrospective chart review. Children and adolescent patients with BD and non-BD prescribed lithium in a mental health and neurological disorders hospital between 2012 and 2017 were included in the study. Data were collected from the electronic medical files. Laboratory values for WBC count, serum creatinine, and TSH levels at baseline within the week before the onset of lithium, and at 1st, 3rd, 6th, and 12th month of treatment were recorded. Results: A total of 143 patients (82 females, 61 males; 100 BD, 43 non-BD) aged 9-18 were included. Non-BD diagnoses were psychotic and schizoaffective disorders, unipolar depression, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder, severe mood dysregulation syndrome, borderline personality disorder, and autism. Mean age of the participants were 15.90 +- 1.16 years for the bipolar group and 14.88 +- 1.79 years for the nonbipolar group. Patients with BD reported more adverse effects. There was a statistically significant increase in WBC counts and TSH levels at any time point. A statistically significant elevation in serum creatinine was found at 3rd and 12th month of treatment. During the course of lithium treatment, WBC counts exceeded 13,000 in 14 (9.8%) patients, and TSH levels exceeded 5.5 mU/L in 41 patients (28.6%). Twenty-one (14.68%) patients were started on thyroxin replacement. Basal TSH levels and duration of the lithium treatment were higher in the participants with TSH levels exceeding 5.5 mU/L. Lithium maximum dose, lithium blood level, basal TSH level, and duration of treatment were higher in the participants receiving thyroxin replacement. No patients had serum creatinine levels exceeding the normal reference values. Conclusion: Our study suggests that lithium is a generally safe and tolerable agent for children and adolescents with BD and non-BD; however, close monitoring of thyroid functions particularly in patients with a higher basal TSH level and longer duration of lithium use is important.
35384628|a|
35384627|a|
35384626|a|Up to 80% of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) experience sleep problems, which have been associated with more severe presentations of ASD symptoms. We examined the bidirectional link between sleep problems and specific ASD symptoms at two time points within 5 years in a well-characterized sample (659 children with ASD). Using cross-lagged panel analyses, we found evidence for a unidirectional link between baseline ASD symptoms (specifically repetitive behaviors, atypical behaviors, communication, and peer interactions) and future sleep problems, but did not find evidence of a bidirectional relationship. We did not find any longitudinal association between social reciprocity and sleep problems. It is important for providers and caregivers to understand and monitor the link between ASD symptoms and sleep problems.
35384534|a|Exposure to air pollution during prenatal or neonatal periods is associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) according to epidemiology studies. Furthermore, prenatal exposure to valproic acid (VPA) has also been found to be associated with an increased prevalence of ASD. To assess the association between simultaneous exposure to VPA and air pollutants, seven exposure groups of rats were included in current study (PM2.5 and gaseous pollutants exposed - high dose of VPA (PGE-high); PM2.5 and gaseous pollutants exposed - low dose of VPA (PGE-low); gaseous pollutants only exposed - high dose of VPA (GE-high); gaseous pollutants only exposed - low dose of VPA (GE-low); clean air exposed - high dose of VPA (CAE-high); clean air exposed - low dose of VPA (CAE-low) and clean air exposed (CAE)). The pollution-exposed rats were exposed to air pollutants from embryonic day (E0) to postnatal day 42 (PND42). In all the induced groups, decreased oxidative stress biomarkers, decreased oxytocin receptor (OXTR) levels, and increased the expression of interleukin 6 (IL-6), interleukin 1beta (IL-1beta), and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) were found. The volumes of the cerebellum, hippocampus, striatum, and prefrontal decreased in all induced groups in comparison to CAE. Additionally, increased numerical density of glial cells and decreased of numerical density of neurons were found in all induced groups. Results show that simultaneous exposure to air pollution and VPA can cause ASD-related behavioral deficits and air pollution reinforced the mechanism of inducing ASD s in VPA-induced rat model of autism.
35384508|a|The purpose of this study is to examine whether motor development problems in infancy predicted mental disorders later in childhood, taking a wide array of potential confounding variables into consideration. This longitudinal study included an unselected study population of 33238 newborn children from the Copenhagen area, Denmark. Data on the predictor variable, motor development problems at 8-10 months of age, were obtained from the community health nurses' systematic evaluation of the child's motor development during a home visit and stored in the Child Health Database. Data on outcome, diagnosed mental disorders before the age of 8 years, were obtained from the Danish National Patient Register. Potential confounding variables were obtained from the Child Health Database, the National Birth Register and the Civil Registration System. The prevalence of motor development problems at 8-10 months of age was 19.3%; the incidence of any diagnosed mental disorder from 11 months of age to the 8th birthday was 4.0%. Motor development problems were associated with an increased risk of being diagnosed with a mental disorder before the 8th birthday, adjusted odds ratio (AOR) 1.47 (1.29-1.67). Motor development problems were associated with later neurodevelopmental disorders, AOR 1.77 (1.52-2.06), in particular autism spectrum disorders, AOR 1.63 (1.31-2.03), hyperactivity/attention deficit disorders, AOR 1.29 (1.03-1.61) and disorders of intellectual disability, AOR 3.28 (2.39-4.49). CONCLUSION: Motor development problems as early at 8-10 months of age were predictive of neurodevelopmental disorders before the 8th birthday. The findings call for clinical attention and more research on preventive potentials in the community child health care. WHAT IS KNOWN:   Children with ASD, ADHD and ID have high prevalence of early motor development problems. WHAT IS NEW:   Motor development problems in infancy predicted neurodevelopmental disorders before the 8th birthday.   This observation could improve early identification and prevention of mental health problems in childhood.
35384380|a|We aim to systematically explore the potential genetic correlations between five major psychiatric disorders and gestational ages. Genome-wide association study (GWAS) summary datasets of attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), bipolar disorder (BD), schizophrenia (SCZ) and major depressive disorder (MDD) in discovery were downloaded from the Psychiatric GWAS Consortium (PGC) website. Suggestive (Raw p < 0.05) genetic associations in the discovery phrase were further replicated in independent GWASs which downloaded from PGC, the FinnGen study or Integrative Psychiatric Research (iPSYCH) website. GWASs of gestational duration, preterm and post-term birth were derived from previous studies of infants from the Early Growth Genetics (EGG) Consortium, the iPSYCH study, and the Genomic and Proteomic Network for Preterm Birth Research (GPN). We calculated genetic correlations using linkage disequilibrium score (LDSC) regression. Mendelian randomization (MR) analyses were performed to investigate the causal effects. We identified four suggestive genetic correlations between psychiatric disorders and gestational age factors in discovery LDSC and two replicated in a confirmation LDSC: gestational duration and ADHD (rg  = -0.1405, FDR p = 0.0406), post-term birth and SCZ (rg  = -0.2003, FDR p = 0.0042). We also observed causal effect of post-term birth on SCZ by MR (PWeighted median  = 0.037, PInverse variance weighted  = 0.007). Our analysis suggested no significant evidence of horizontal pleiotropy and heterogeneity. This study showed the genetic correlation evidences between gestational age phenotypes and psychiatric disorders, providing novel clues for understanding the pathogenic factors of common psychiatric disorders. LAY SUMMARY: Whereas gestational age factors were reported to be associated with psychiatric disorders, the genetic relationship and causality remain to be revealed. The present study reported the first large-scale genetic correlations investigation of the associations between gestational age phenotypes and psychiatric disorders. Results indicate causal relationships between post-term birth and schizophrenia (SCZ), as well as suggestive genetic correlations between gestational duration and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). This study provided novel clues for understanding the pathogenic factors of common psychiatric disorders.
35384343|a|Visuospatial organization abilities are closely related to other visuospatial processing skills, such as visuomotor coordination, perceptual abilities, mental rotation, and working memory (WM). One task that enables visuospatial organization abilities to be investigated is the Rey-Osterrieth complex figure test (ROCFT). When examining visuospatial functioning, individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have proved capable of operating both locally and globally, depending on the sub-domain embraced, with a preference for a locally-oriented processing of visuospatial information. The present research aimed to establish whether different underlying visuospatial skills might account for performance in the ROCFT in children and adolescents with ASD, compared with typically developing (TD), by considering the role of local/global visuospatial processing. The study involved 39 participants who have ASD without intellectual disability, and 57 TD aged 8-16 years. The participants were administered tasks assessing visuospatial organization abilities, manual dexterity, visual perception, mental rotation, spatial-sequential, spatial-simultaneous WM, and visuospatial processing. Our results suggest that manual dexterity and visuospatial processing similarly explain performance in both groups, while differences in visuospatial WM account for the two groups' visuospatial organization abilities. Spatial-simultaneous WM predicted performance in copy and recall conditions in the TD group but not in the ASD group, while spatial-sequential WM only did so in the latter group, reinforcing the tendency of children with ASD towards local bias in the visuospatial organization domain. The implications of these findings are discussed. LAY SUMMARY: The visuospatial organization abilities of children and adolescents with and without autism were compared, considering their underlying visuospatial skills. Visuospatial organization impairments emerged for children with autism, who differed from typically developing children in the underlying visuospatial skills involved. Given the crucial role of visuospatial organization abilities in everyday life, our results could inspire practitioners to develop training interventions that take into account the strengths and weaknesses of individuals with autism.
35384338|a|Individuals with an autism spectrum disorder (ASD) experience persistent difficulties during social interactions and communication. Previously, it has been suggested that deficits in the so-called "mirror system," active during both action execution and observation, may underlie these social difficulties. It is still a topic of debate however whether deficiencies in the simulation of others' actions (i.e., "broken" mirroring) forms a general feature of ASD, or whether these mostly reflect a lack of social attunement. The latter would suggest an overall intact mirror system, but an impaired modulation of mirror activity according to variable social contexts. In this study, 25 adults with ASD and 28 age- and IQ-matched control participants underwent transcranial magnetic stimulation during the observation of hand movements under variable conditions. Hand movements were presented via a live interaction partner, either without social context to assess basic motor mirroring or in combination with direct and averted gaze from the actor to assess socially modulated mirroring. Overall, no significant group differences were revealed, indicating no generally diminished mirror activity in ASD. Interestingly however, regression analyses revealed that, among ASD participants, higher symptom severity was associated with both reduced basic motor mirroring and aberrant socially modulated mirroring (i.e., no enhancement of mirror system activity upon observation of the interaction partner's direct vs. averted gaze). These findings further challenge the notion that mirror system dysfunctions constitute a principal feature of ASD, but demonstrate that variations in mirroring may be related to differential expressions of ASD symptom severity. LAY SUMMARY: Our findings show similar activity levels in brain regions responsible for action simulation and understanding in adults with autism, compared to adults without autism. However, the presence of more severe autism symptoms was linked to reduced activity in these regions. This suggests lower levels of brain activity during action understanding in some, but not all, persons with autism, which may contribute to the social difficulties these persons experience in daily life.
35383319|a|Converging evidence points to the significant involvement of the immune system in autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Positron emission tomography (PET) can quantify translocator protein 18 kDa (TSPO), a marker with increased expression mainly in microglia and, to some extent astroglia during neuropsychiatric diseases with inflammation. This preliminary analysis explored, for the first time, whether TSPO binding was altered in male and female participants with ASD in vivo using full kinetic quantification. Thirteen individuals with ASD (IQ > 70 [n = 12], IQ = 62 [n = 1]), 5 F, 25 +- 5 years) were scanned with [18F]FEPPA PET. Data from 13 typically developing control participants with matching age and TSPO rs6971 polymorphism (9 F, age 24 +- 5 years) were chosen from previous studies for comparison. The two tissue compartment model (2TCM) was used to determine the total volume of distribution ([18F]FEPPA VT) in four previously identified regions of interest (ROI): prefrontal, temporal, cerebellar, and anterior cingulate cortices. We observe no significant difference in [18F]FEPPA VT relative to controls (F(1,26)= 1.74, p = 0.20). However, 2 ASD participants with higher VT had concurrent major depressive episodes (MDE), which has been consistently reported during MDE. After excluding those 2 ASD participants, in a post-hoc analysis, our results show lower [18F]FEPPA VT in ASD participants compared to controls (F(1,24)= 6.62, p = 0.02). This preliminary analysis provides evidence suggesting an atypical neuroimmune state in ASD.
35381445|a|Neurological disorders encompass an extremely broad range of conditions, including those that present early in development and those that progress slowly or manifest with advanced age. Although these disorders have distinct underlying etiologies, the activation of shared pathways, e.g., integrated stress response (ISR) and the development of shared phenotypes (sleep deficits) may offer clues toward understanding some of the mechanistic underpinnings of neurologic dysfunction. While it is incontrovertibly complex, the relationship between sleep and persistent stress in the brain has broad implications in understanding neurological disorders from development to degeneration. The convergent nature of the ISR could be a common thread linking genetically distinct neurological disorders through the dysregulation of a core cellular homeostasis pathway.
35381076|a|IMPORTANCE: Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) often experience feeding challenges related to difficulties with sensory integration. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the content, acceptability, and usefulness of MealSense , an online parent education program for children with ASD who have feeding challenges related to poor sensory integration. DESIGN: A descriptive study in which experts reviewed and rated MealSense content for consistency with Ayres Sensory Integration  (ASI) principles and evidence-based practices in feeding. PARTICIPANTS: A convenience sample of expert reviewers (n = 5) and parents of children with ASD and feeding challenges (n = 5). RESULTS: Expert ratings (n = 5) met criteria showing that MealSense is consistent with ASI and evidence-based practices in feeding. Parent ratings (n = 5) met criteria showing that MealSense is acceptable and useful. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: MealSense is acceptable and useful to parents of children with ASD and is consistent with ASI and evidence-based practices in feeding. What This Article Adds: This study provides preliminary support for MealSense as an evidence-based tool to supplement direct intervention for children with ASD and feeding difficulties. Further research is needed to determine its efficacy in improving the transfer of feeding skills into the home environment.
35380950|a|
35380336|a|PURPOSE: Prenatal infection during pregnancy is a risk factor for schizophrenia, as well as for other developmental psychiatric disorders, such as autism and bipolar disorder. Schizophrenia patients were reported to have altered brain metabolism and neuroinflammation. However, the link between prenatal infection, altered brain inflammation and metabolism, and schizophrenia remains unclear. In this project, we aimed to evaluate whether there are changes in brain glucose consumption and microglia activation in the offspring of pregnant rats exposed to maternal immune activation (MIA), and if so, whether these changes occur before or after the initiation of schizophrenia-like behaviour. PROCEDURES: Pregnant rats were treated with the viral mimic polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (MIA group) or saline (control group) on gestational day 15. Static PET scans of the male offspring were acquired on postnatal day (PND) 21, 60, and 90, using [11C]-PK11195 and deoxy-2-[18F]fluoro-D-glucose ([18F]-FDG) as tracers to measure TSPO expression in activated microglia and brain glucose consumption, respectively. On PND60 and PND90, anxiety-like behaviour, recognition memory, and sensorimotor gating were measured using the open field test (OFT), novel object recognition test (NOR), and prepulse inhibition test (PPI). RESULTS: [18F]-FDG PET demonstrated that MIA offspring displayed higher brain glucose consumption in the whole brain after weaning (p = 0.017), and in the frontal cortex during late adolescence (p = 0.001) and adulthood (p = 0.037) than control rats. [11C]-PK11195 PET did not reveal any changes in TSPO expression in MIA offspring. Prenatal infection induced age-related behavioural alterations. Adolescent MIA offspring displayed a more anxious state in the OFT than controls (p = 0.042). Adult MIA offspring showed recognition memory deficits in the NOR (p = 0.003). Our study did not show any PPI deficits. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that prenatal immune activation changed neurodevelopment, resulting in increased brain glucose consumption, but not in microglia activation. The increased brain glucose consumption in the frontal cortex of MIA offspring remained until adulthood and was associated with increased anxiety-like behaviour during adolescence and recognition memory deficits in adulthood.
35380165|a|BACKGROUND: The families of healthcare professionals are one of the most vulnerable groups whose lives have been severely damaged by the COVID-19 pandemic. So far, the experiences and perceptions of these individuals have not been explored. The present study aims to investigate the experiences and perceptions of the family members of the healthcare professionals during COVID-19. METHODS: The present study is a qualitative research with a phenomenological design. The participants were 25 family members of healthcare professionals which were selected from the medical centres in Iran via purposeful sampling from August 2021 to October 2021. The sampling was kept on until the data became saturated. To collect data, individual semi-structured interviews were conducted online. The Colaizzi approach was used to analyse the data collected. RESULTS: The findings of the study emerged as two main themes: psychological tension with five categories (indescribable fear and worry, longing to see their loved ones, patient stone, bitter farewell, fear of the future) and dignity with four categories (acclamation, appreciation, feeling proud, spiritual growth). CONCLUSION: During the COVID-19 pandemic, the family members of healthcare professionals have experienced dignity combined with the degrees of psychological tension which were beyond the experiences of the majority of people in the society, but similar to the psychological tension experienced by the families of COVID-19 victims. The families of healthcare workers are continuously anxious about the safety of their loved ones who are responsible to obtain the treatment of COVID-19 patients, which potentially jeopardizes their physical and psychological well-being. Therefore, the appreciation and support of people in the community of the family members of healthcare professionals have increased their tolerance. Healthcare providers can successfully promote the health of healthcare professionals' families by providing comprehensive assistance to healthcare personnel and their families.
35379995|a|Hydrocephalus, characterized by cerebral ventricular dilatation, is routinely attributed to primary defects in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) homeostasis. This fosters CSF shunting as the leading reason for brain surgery in children despite considerable disease heterogeneity. In this study, by integrating human brain transcriptomics with whole-exome sequencing of 483 patients with congenital hydrocephalus (CH), we found convergence of CH risk genes in embryonic neuroepithelial stem cells. Of all CH risk genes, TRIM71/lin-41 harbors the most de novo mutations and is most specifically expressed in neuroepithelial cells. Mice harboring neuroepithelial cell-specific Trim71 deletion or CH-specific Trim71 mutation exhibit prenatal hydrocephalus. CH mutations disrupt TRIM71 binding to its RNA targets, causing premature neuroepithelial cell differentiation and reduced neurogenesis. Cortical hypoplasia leads to a hypercompliant cortex and secondary ventricular enlargement without primary defects in CSF circulation. These data highlight the importance of precisely regulated neuroepithelial cell fate for normal brain-CSF biomechanics and support a clinically relevant neuroprogenitor-based paradigm of CH.
35379376|a|BACKGROUND: Anorexia nervosa (AN) is a psychiatric disorder with complex etiology, with a significant portion of disease risk imparted by genetics. Traditional genome-wide association studies (GWAS) produce principal evidence for the association of genetic variants with disease. Transcriptomic imputation (TI) allows for the translation of those variants into regulatory mechanisms, which can then be used to assess the functional outcome of genetically regulated gene expression (GReX) in a broader setting through the use of phenome-wide association studies (pheWASs) in large and diverse clinical biobank populations with electronic health record phenotypes. METHODS: Here, we applied TI using S-PrediXcan to translate the most recent PGC-ED AN GWAS findings into AN-GReX. For significant genes, we imputed AN-GReX in the Mount Sinai BioMe  Biobank and performed pheWASs on over 2000 outcomes to test the clinical consequences of aberrant expression of these genes. We performed a secondary analysis to assess the impact of body mass index (BMI) and sex on AN-GReX clinical associations. RESULTS: Our S-PrediXcan analysis identified 53 genes associated with AN, including what is, to our knowledge, the first-genetic association of AN with the major histocompatibility complex. AN-GReX was associated with autoimmune, metabolic, and gastrointestinal diagnoses in our biobank cohort, as well as measures of cholesterol, medications, substance use, and pain. Additionally, our analyses showed moderation of AN-GReX associations with measures of cholesterol and substance use by BMI, and moderation of AN-GReX associations with celiac disease by sex. CONCLUSIONS: Our BMI-stratified results provide potential avenues of functional mechanism for AN-genes to investigate further.
35379370|a|To date, a deficit-oriented approach dominates autism spectrum disorder (ASD) research, including studies of infant siblings of children with ASD at high risk (HR) for the disabilities associated with this disorder. Despite scientific advances regarding early ASD-related risk, there remains little systematic investigation of positive development, limiting the scope of research and quite possibly a deeper understanding of pathways toward and away from ASD-related impairments. In this paper, we argue that integrating a resilience framework into early ASD research has the potential to enhance knowledge on prodromal course, phenotypic heterogeneity, and developmental processes of risk and adaptation. We delineate a developmental systems resilience framework with particular reference to HR infants. To illustrate the utility of a resilience perspective, we consider the "female protective effect" and other evidence of adaptation in the face of ASD-related risk. We suggest that a resilience framework invites focal questions about the nature, timing, levels, interactions, and mechanisms by which positive adaptation occurs in relation to risk and developmental pathways toward and away from ASD-related difficulties. We conclude with recommendations for future research, including more focus on adaptive development and multisystem processes, pathways away from disorder, and reconsideration of extant evidence within an integrated risk-and-resilience framework.
35379083|a|There is a paucity of research examining multivariate base rates (MBRs) of elevated scores in pediatric rating scales of cognition. We present novel MBR information on the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function, Second Edition (BRIEF2) for several clinical groups: Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Combined Presentation (ADHD-C); ADHD Inattentive Presentation (ADHD-I); Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD); and Specific Learning Disorder with impairment in Reading (SLD-R). Participants included children diagnosed as having ADHD-C (n = 350), ADHD-I (n = 343), ASD (n = 390), or SLD-R (n = 240). Cumulative MBRs (e.g., the % of a sample having one or more elevated scores) were examined for each BRIEF2 form (Parent, Teacher, and Self-Report) and at three T-score cutoffs (T >= 60, T >= 65, and T >= 70). The MBR of obtaining at least one elevated score was common across clinical groups and forms at T >= 60 (ADHD-C = 90.5-98.1%; ADHD-I = 83.9-98.7%; ASD = 90.3-96.9%, SLD-R = 60.0-78.4%), T >= 65 (ADHD-C = 66.7-97.2%; ADHD-I = 77.5-94.9%; ASD = 77.3-92.7%; SLD-R = 38.5-64.0%), and T >= 70 (ADHD-C = 52.4-89.4%; ADHD-I = 64.8-84.2%; ASD = 54.5-83.2%; SLD-R = 26.9-44.1%). MBRs appeared to differ as a function of group (ADHD-C > ADHD-I > ASD > SLD-R) and form (Parent > Teacher > Self-Report) though future research with well-defined samples is needed to investigate this. We provide novel MBR information to enhance clinical interpretation of BRIEF2 data.
35378963|a|Background: Autism spectrum disorder is characterized by atypical developmental changes during brain maturation, but regional brain functional changes that occur with age and across different frequency bands are unknown. Therefore, the current study aimed to explore potential age and frequency band-related changes in the regional brain activities in autism. Methods: A total of 65 participants who met the DSM-IV criteria for autistic disorder and 55 typically developed (TD) participants (both age 6-30 years) were recruited in the current study. The two groups were matched in age (t=-1.314, P=0.191) and gender (chi2=2.760, P=0.097). The amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations (ALFF) was employed to explore the effect of development on spontaneous brain activity in individuals with autism and in TD participants across slow-5 (0.01-0.027 Hz), slow-4 (0.027-0.073 Hz), and slow-3 (0.073-0.1 Hz) frequency bands. The diagnosis-by-age interaction effect in the whole brain voxels in autism and TD groups was investigated. Results: Autism individuals showed significantly higher ALFF in the dorsal striatum in childhood (Caudate cluster: t=3.626, P=0.001; Putamen cluster: t=2.839, P=0.007) and remarkably lower ALFF in the dorsal striatum in adulthood (Caudate cluster: t=-2.198, P=0.038; Putamen cluster: t=-2.314, P=0.030) relative to TD, while no significant differences were observed in adolescence (all P>0.05). In addition, abnormal ALFF amplitudes were specific to the slow-4 (0.027-0.073 Hz) frequency band in the clusters above. Conclusions: The current study indicated abnormal development patterns in the spontaneous activity of the dorsal striatum in autism and highlighted the potential role of the slow-4 frequency band in the pathology of autism. Also, the potential brain mechanism of autism was revealed, suggesting that autism-related variations should be investigated in a specific frequency.
35378841|a|The trial-based functional analysis (TBFA) offers several advantages in natural settings, such as time efficiency and ecological validity. Previous studies have successfully trained or coached a variety of professionals and parents to conduct a TBFA utilizing in-person training procedures; however, no study has evaluated the effectiveness of telehealth coach or train others to implement a TBFA. Utilizing telehealth coaching, we coached three mothers of children with autism to conduct a TBFA in their home. The TBFA identified consequences maintaining challenging behavior for all three participants. Based on the results of the TBFA, we developed a functional communication training (FCT) intervention. Experimenters coached the mothers to implement the FCT intervention in their home. All interventions resulted in decreased challenging behavior and increased communication. The results suggest parents are capable of conducting a valid TBFA with telehealth coaching and support.
35377401|a|
35377335|a|The number of children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) has significantly increased over the last few years. On the one hand, this surge may be associated with increased awareness of this entity and the greater availability of diagnostic tools. On the other hand, influence of factors believed to cause or facilitate ASD development (including environment pollution, stress of modern civilization, brain trauma and use of drugs) could have a negative impact on individuals in the phase of their social and psychological development. Due to the increasing problem, more and more attention is being focused on early detection of ASD, what allows to intervene at the earliest time point. In consequence, the quality of life of ASD-affected people may be significantly improved if diagnosed early. In this review, the list of possible risk factors for ASD is critically appraised and some "pearls for practice", helping in early diagnosis of even mild ASD are outlined.
35377050|a|Gender dysphoria is distress in relation to incongruence between an individual's gender and sex assigned at birth. Gender clinics offer support for gender dysphoria, and there is a higher prevalence of autism in young people attending such clinics than in the general population. We aimed to investigate the lived experiences of autistic young people who have experienced gender dysphoria, and their parents, using a multi-perspectival IPA design. Young autistic people aged 13-17 years (n = 15), and their parents (n = 16), completed in-depth interviews about the young person's experience of gender dysphoria. We analysed each individual transcript to generate individual themes, and for each of the dyads, developed themes which acknowledged the similarities and differences in parent-child perspectives. The first superordinate theme was coping with distress which had two subordinate themes; understanding difficult feelings and focus on alleviating distress with external support. This theme described how young people were overwhelmed by negative feelings which they came to understand as being about gender incongruence and looked to alleviate these feelings through a gender transition. The second superordinate theme was working out who I am which had two subordinate themes: the centrality of different identities and needs and thinking about gender. This theme described how young people and their parents focused on different needs; while young people more often focused on their gender-related needs, parents focused on autism-related needs. We conclude that young people and parents may have different perspectives and priorities when it comes to meeting the needs of autistic young people who experience gender dysphoria.
35373426|a|BACKGROUND: Prosocial helping is a fundamental communication behaviour that supports successful social relationships. This study investigated the clinical utility of the Analog Task of Prosocial Helping (AToP-H): a tool for assessing how helping is influenced by the communicative function it serves and the cues used to elicit helping in young children with and without a social communication disorder. AIMS: To present evidence of the AToP-H's reliability, validity and clinical utility. METHODS & PROCEDURES: The AToP-H examines three communicative functions expressed through helping-instrumental (request-based), informative (information-based) and empathic (emotion-based) helping-within a naturalistic context. Prosocial helping is elicited using semi-structured interactions in which increasingly explicit cues are provided to scaffold child responses. To gather reliability and validity evidence, the AToP-H was administered to 20 children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (49-79 months) and 20 with typical development (37-77 months). OUTCOMES & RESULTS: Procedural reliability and inter-observer agreement for the AToP-H were high. Item-level codes were consistent with overall task performance, showing strong internal consistency. Supporting construct validity, higher scores were observed in older children with ASD, consistent with an expectedly protracted developmental period for prosocial helping. Children with ASD required more cues to elicit helping overall and informative and empathic helping in particular. Furthermore, more children with ASD did not respond or required explicit cues to respond with informative and empathic helping. Supporting criterion-related validity, total helping cue scores were significantly correlated with measures of social cognition, social abilities and receptive language, but were only weakly correlated with general language. CONCLUSIONS & IMPLICATIONS: The AToP-H shows promise in measuring helping performance as an indicator of young children's social communication strengths and weaknesses as well as scaffolding cues to facilitate intervention planning. WHAT THIS PAPER ADDS: What is already known on the subject Prosocial helping is critical for successful relationships, which can be difficult for children with social communication disorders such as ASD. Two factors that influence helping are the communicative function of the helping behaviour and the cues used to elicit helping. Existing helping tasks have been developed for research purposes, focusing on internal validity with little attention to applying or generalizing results to clinical settings or groups. Thus, assessing factors that influence helping behaviours in naturalistic, ecologically valid contexts could provide clinicians with critical information to improve prosocial helping in children with social communication disorders. What this paper adds to existing knowledge This paper presents preliminary psychometric evidence for a naturalistic clinical task: the AToP-H, which assesses instrumental (request-based), informative (information-based) and empathic (emotion-based) helping elicited with increasingly explicit cues. What are the potential or actual clinical implications of this work? Evidence from samples of young children with and without ASD supports the reliability and validity of AToP-H scores. The AToP-H shows promise as a clinical tool to effectively assess and plan interventions targeting social communication, prosocial helping and associated interactions.
35372341|a|Abnormalities in myelination are associated to behavioral and cognitive dysfunction in neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders. Thus, therapies to promote or accelerate myelination could potentially ameliorate symptoms in autism. Clemastine, a histamine H1 antagonist with anticholinergic properties against muscarinic M1 receptor, is the most promising drug with promyelinating properties. Clemastine penetrates the blood brain barrier efficiently and promotes remyelination in different animal models of neurodegeneration including multiple sclerosis, ischemia and Alzheimer's disease. However, its role in myelination during development is unknown. We showed that clemastine treatment during development increased oligodendrocyte differentiation in both white and gray matter. However, despite the increase in the number of oligodendrocytes, conduction velocity of myelinated fibers of corpus callosum decreased in clemastine treated mice. Confocal and electron microscopy showed a reduction in the number of myelinated axons and nodes of Ranvier and a reduction of myelin thickness in corpus callosum. To understand the mechanisms leading to myelin formation impairment in the presence of an excess of myelinating oligodendrocytes, we focused on microglial cells that also express muscarinic M1 receptors. Importantly, the population of CD11c+ microglia cells, necessary for myelination, as well as the levels of insulin growth factor-1 decrease in clemastine-treated mice. Altogether, these data suggest that clemastine impact on myelin development is more complex than previously thought and could be dependent on microglia-oligodendrocyte crosstalk. Further studies are needed to clarify the role of microglia cells on developmental myelination.
35372141|a|Objective: To investigate whether the provision of learning style profile (LSP) training improves development in preschool children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in China and to describe the characteristics of children who benefit from the intervention. Methods: Eighty-one children aged 36 to 72 months who were diagnosed with ASD for the first time were recruited for the intervention group. All of them received 24 weeks of LSP training, consisting of hospital- and home-based training. Twenty-one children with ASD of the same age in the control group had never received any intervention after diagnosis but underwent an assessment. Assessments were conducted at baseline and 24 weeks later. Differences in the developmental level and severity of ASD symptoms over time and between groups were analyzed by repeated standardized measures. Secondary analyses examined age effects among the 36- 48-, 48- 60-, and 60-72-month age groups. Results: Within-group comparison of the intervention group revealed significant treatment effects after the intervention, according to: language, social and adaptive developmental quotients (DQs) of the China Developmental Scale; total Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) score; and hyperactivity, peer problems, total difficulties, and prosocial behavior scores of the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ). Similar gains were observed in gross and fine motor DQs of the China Developmental Scale and emotional symptoms and conduct problems scores of the SDQ; however, the differences between these pre- and postintervention scores did not reach statistical significance. Comparisons among the three age groups in the intervention groups demonstrated a significant age effect on adaptive DQs of the China Developmental Scale; total CARS score; hyperactivity, peer problems and total difficulties scores of the SDQ. Comparison between the intervention and control groups revealed significant treatment effects on language, social and adaptive DQs of the China Developmental Scale; total CARS score; and emotional symptoms, conduct problems, hyperactivity, peer problems, total difficulties, and prosocial behavior scores of the SDQ after the intervention. Similar gains were observed in gross and fine motor DQs of the China Developmental Scale, although differences between the two groups did not reach statistical significance. Conclusion: Our findings suggest that LSP training can effectively improve social behavior and reduce the severity of ASD symptoms in children with ASD. Our data also highlight the importance of early intervention.
35371826|a|Childhood-onset schizophrenia (COS) is a rare disorder in which symptoms of schizophrenia occur before the age of 13 years. This disorder often has a complicated presentation that can mimic other childhood disorders including post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), major depressive disorder (MDD) with psychosis, and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) among others. This is further complicated by the low prevalence rate of COS which limits understanding of the disorder. Accurate and timely diagnosis is crucial as failure to do so has adverse implications for long-term treatment outcomes and prognosis. In this study, a rare case of a 12-year-old girl with childhood-onset schizophrenia and key findings that help differentiate it from other childhood disorders are reviewed to guide diagnosis and treatment.
35371793|a|The nature of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) presents significant challenges, especially with regard to comorbidities and drug treatments. Parents and caregivers are often hesitant towards psychotropic medications, mainly due to the fear of side effects. Problems arise when comorbid symptomatology reaches extreme levels, leading to functional decline in the patients. We discuss the case of a 13-year-old girl diagnosed with autism disorder who presented with a long history of social, interpersonal, and academic challenges. The patient was hospitalized with the complaint of a persistent, non-painful, and unpleasant sensation in the perineal area that eventually resulted in repetitive and compulsive behaviors. Robot-enhanced relaxation training was introduced to support the patient since she declined to undergo any form of talk therapy. The aim of the intervention was to prevent the irritation from escalating and promote self-regulation skills. The results, based on parent reporting, indicated that the patient acquired relaxation skills, experienced some positive effects on emotional regulation, and showed a decrease in the duration of her disruptive behaviors upon completing the relaxation training. This case report provides evidence that robot-assisted relaxation training may be effective in dealing with ASD-related behavioral disturbances and comorbid anxiety.
35371414|a|Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are often prescribed psychotropic medications but pharmacotherapy is typically conducted and evaluated based on clinical judgement without reference to objective measurement of treatment effectiveness and combined efficacy of pharmacological-behavioral interventions. We describe an interdisciplinary review team (IRT) model at a human services organization for children with ASD that was designed to standardize a process of psychotropic medication monitoring through (1) coordinated involvement of medical, nursing, behavior analyst, and special education professionals, (2) parent-guardian participation, (3) data-driven decision making, and (4) high-level administrative support. Our description includes case illustrations of medication reduction-elimination trials with five students and social validity assessment of IRT clinicians, nurses, and parent-guardians. Key components of the IRT model are emphasized with associated practice and research recommendations.
35371383|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by core deficits in social interaction and communication. Collaborative puzzle games are interactive activities that can be played to foster the collaboration and verbal-communication skills of children with ASD. In this paper, we have designed an intelligent agent that can play collaborative puzzle games with children and verbally communicate with them as if it is another human player. Furthermore, this intelligent agent is also able to automatically measure children's task-performance and verbal-communication behaviors throughout game play. Two preliminary studies were conducted with children with ASD to evaluate the feasibility and performance of the intelligent agent. Results of Study I demonstrated the intelligent agent's ability to play games and communicate with children within the game-playing domain. Results of Study II indicated its potential to measure the communication and collaboration skills of human users.
35370982|a|Epidemiological studies have shown that maternal hormone exposure is associated with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). The hormone oxytocin (OXT) is a central nervous neuropeptide that plays an important role in social behaviors as well as ASD etiology, although the detailed mechanism remains largely unknown. In this study, we aim to investigate the potential role and contribution of OXT to prenatal progestin exposure-mediated mouse offspring. Our in vitro study in the hypothalamic neurons that isolated from paraventricular nuclei area of mice showed that transient progestin exposure causes persistent epigenetic changes on the OXT promoter, resulting in dissociation of estrogen receptor beta (ERbeta) and retinoic acid-related orphan receptor alpha (RORA) from the OXT promoter with subsequent persistent OXT suppression. Our in vivo study showed that prenatal exposure of medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) triggers social deficits in mouse offspring; prenatal OXT deficiency in OXT knockdown mouse partly mimics, while postnatal ERbeta expression or postnatal OXT peptide injection partly ameliorates, prenatal MPA exposure-mediated social deficits, which include impaired social interaction and social abilities. On the other hand, OXT had no effect on prenatal MPA exposure-mediated anxiety-like behaviors. We conclude that prenatal MPA exposure-mediated oxytocin suppression contributes to social deficits in mouse offspring.
35370868|a|The present study aims to evaluate the distinct patterns of working memory (WM) capacity of children with Developmental Language Disorder (DLD), High-functioning children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and children with Down syndrome (DS). More specifically, the current study investigates the complex relationship of fluid intelligence and WM between 39 children with DLD, 20 H igh-functioning children with ASD, and 15 children with DS. All children were evaluated in different measures of Phonological Working Memory, Visual-spatial Working Memory whereas Fluid Intelligence was measured with Raven Progressive Matrices. The result analysis revealed a significant difference among the three groups, both among each function separately and the correlations among them, as well. The results revealed that the DLD groups and High-functioning ASD group exhibited a common picture or an overlap of performances in all Phonological and Visuo-spatial working memory measures, except Backward Digit Recall task. As for the DS group research findings revealed different and unique working memory patterns in comparison to DLD group and High-functioning ASD. Their differences have been studied and further conclusions have been drawn about the different patterns of working memory among the three clinical groups. The implications of these findings are discussed in light of support for learning. The common profile that characterize the two developmental conditions and the distinct pattern of working memory performance in DS group underlies the need for further research in the field.
35370852|a|Given the importance of early detection, it is critical to understand the non-linearity in manifestation of ASD before age 24 months, when ASD symptoms are beginning to consolidate, through the age of 36 months when stability of ASD diagnosis is reportedly high into school-age when increased demands may challenge previously successful compensatory processes and permit first ASD detection. We employed a prospective, longitudinal design focused on children with an older sibling with ASD (n = 210) who received diagnostic evaluations at mean ages of 15.4 months (Time 1), 36.6 months (Time 2), and 5.7 years (Time 3) to examine: (1) diagnostic stability, (2) developmental trajectories associated with different patterns of ASD vs. non-ASD classifications, and (3) predictors of classification group over time. Clinical best estimate (CBE) diagnosis of ASD or non-ASD was made at each time point. Linear mixed-effects models were implemented to examine differences in developmental trajectories of stable and dynamic diagnostic groups. Multinomial logistic regression analyses were used to examine predictors of the likelihood of belonging to each CBE diagnostic classification group. Results revealed that sensitivity and stability of an ASD diagnosis significantly increased from Time 1 (sensitivity: 52%; stability: 63%) to Time 2 (sensitivity: 86%; stability: 68%). Different developmental trajectories of autism symptom severity and non-verbal and verbal IQ were observed across groups, with differences first observed at Time 1 and becoming more pronounced through Time 3. Presence of restricted and repetitive behaviors as well as limitations in initiation of joint attention and expressive language skills differentially predicted the likelihood of belonging to the different CBE diagnostic classification groups. Results suggest that ASD symptoms may emerge or attenuate over time, with some children meeting diagnosis at follow-up, and other children no longer meeting diagnostic criteria. From a systems perspective, diagnostic non-linearity may be viewed as a dynamic developmental process, where emergent properties arising from various biological, genetic, and experiential factors interact, culminating in phenotypic phenomena that change over time. Clinical implications include extending universal ASD and social communication screening into school-age, supporting families' understanding of diagnostic shifts, and ensuring unbiased diagnostic decision-making when following children with ASD.
35370829|a|The quest to understand the pathophysiology of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has led to extensive literature that purports to provide evidence for autonomic dysfunction based on heart rate and heart rate variability (HRV), in particular respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA), a measure of parasympathetic functioning. Many studies conclude that autism is associated with vagal withdrawal and sympathetic hyperactivation based on HRV and electrodermal analyses. We will argue that a critical analysis of the data leads to the hypothesis that autonomic nervous system dysfunction is not a dominant feature of autism. Most children with ASD have normal parasympathetic baseline values and normal autonomic responses to social stimuli. The existing HRV and electrodermal data cannot lead to the conclusion of an over-excitation of the sympathetic nervous system. A small subgroup of ASD children in experimental settings has relatively low RSA values and relatively high heart rates. The data suggest that this is likely associated with a relatively high level of anxiety during study conditions, associated with co-morbidities such as constipation, or due to the use of psychoactive medication. Many studies interpret their data to conform with a preferred hypothesis of autonomic dysfunction as a trait of autism, related to the polyvagal theory, but the HRV evidence is to the contrary. HRV analysis may identify children with ASD having autonomic dysfunction due to co-morbidities.
35370711|a|Risperidone is approved to treat schizophrenia in adolescents and autistic disorder and bipolar mania in children and adolescents. It is also used off-label in younger children for various psychiatric disorders. Several population pharmacokinetic models of risperidone and 9-OH-risperidone have been published. The objectives of this study were to assess whether opportunistically collected pediatric data can be used to evaluate risperidone population pharmacokinetic models externally and to identify a robust model for precision dosing in children. A total of 103 concentrations of risperidone and 112 concentrations of 9-OH-risperidone, collected from 62 pediatric patients (0.16-16.8 years of age), were used in the present study. The predictive performance of five published population pharmacokinetic models (four joint parent-metabolite models and one parent only) was assessed for accuracy and precision of the predictions using statistical criteria, goodness of fit plots, prediction-corrected visual predictive checks (pcVPCs), and normalized prediction distribution errors (NPDEs). The tested models produced similarly precise predictions (Root Mean Square Error [RMSE]) ranging from 0.021 to 0.027 nmol/ml for risperidone and 0.053-0.065 nmol/ml for 9-OH-risperidone). However, one of the models (a one-compartment mixture model with clearance estimated for three subpopulations) developed with a rich dataset presented fewer biases (Mean Percent Error [MPE, %] of 1.0% vs. 101.4, 146.9, 260.4, and 292.4%) for risperidone. In contrast, a model developed with fewer data and a more similar population to the one used for the external evaluation presented fewer biases for 9-OH-risperidone (MPE: 17% vs. 69.9, 47.8, and 82.9%). None of the models evaluated seemed to be generalizable to the population used in this analysis. All the models had a modest predictive performance, potentially suggesting that sources of inter-individual variability were not entirely captured and that opportunistic data from a highly heterogeneous population are likely not the most appropriate data to evaluate risperidone models externally.
35370389|a|Interventions based upon applied behaviour analysis (ABA) have been shown to be best practice for children with autism spectrum disorder. However, in many parts of the world there is a shortage of appropriately trained behaviour analysts. Telehealth is a potential solution to increasing access to ABA. Our study assessed the use of telehealth to provide parent training in naturalistic teaching strategies designed to increase child communication skills. Five parent child dyads took part in the training, utilising didactic training and synchronous coaching. Parents could be trained to a high level of fidelity and viewed the training favourably. Children showed variable gains in communication and improved positive affect. The project was cost effective in comparison with traditional training models.
35369648|a|Background: The COVID-19 pandemic necessitated the adoption of telemental health (TMH). Pre-pandemic, clinicians had voiced many TMH concerns, but these had not been investigated with respect to autism spectrum disorder (ASD) even with it being known that there are distinct ASD-associated challenges for in-person mental health interventions. Method: A convenience sample of (n = 55) clinicians completed an online survey regarding their perspectives of adopting TMH interventions in ASD, with closed- and open-answered questions. Quantitative and qualitative data were analysed descriptively/inferentially and via Content Analysis, respectively. Results: Multiple clinicians endorsed each TMH challenges/barrier previously identified as concerns in the non-ASD literature. However, overall levels of concern over challenges/barriers were low, and challenges were more likely to be predicted than experienced and considered to be case/presentation specific. Challenges that were considered ASD-specific included the exacerbation of those associated with in-person delivery in ASD, alongside difficulties with trust and appropriate remote social behaviour. On average, clinicians indicated a preference for 50% TMH interventions post-pandemic. Clinicians' perceived technological competence and extent of professional experience with ASD were not significantly associated with levels of concern, nor number of experienced challenges, with TMH interventions in ASD. Conclusion: In support of the existing TMH literature, challenges/barriers were more likely to be predicted than experienced and were considered to be case/presentation-specific, though this may be more variable in ASD owing to the well-established marked heterogeneity in this population. Remote provision of interventions exacerbated in-person ASD-associated challenges, as predicted, but clinician-level factors appeared not to impact TMH perceptions.
35369647|a|In recent years, the role of the dopaminergic system in the regulation of social behavior is being progressively outlined, and dysfunctions of the dopaminergic system are increasingly associated with neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism spectrum disorder (ASD). To study the role of the dopaminergic (DA) system in an animal model of ASD, we investigated the effects of embryonic exposure to valproic acid (VPA) on the postnatal development of the mesencephalic DA system in the domestic chick. We found that VPA affected the rostro-caudal distribution of DA neurons, without changing the expression levels of several dopaminergic markers in the mesencephalon. We also investigated a potential consequence of this altered DA neuronal distribution in the septum, a social brain area previously associated to social behavior in several vertebrate species, describing alterations in the expression of genes linked to DA neurotransmission. These findings support the emerging hypothesis of a role of DA dysfunction in ASD pathogenesis. Together with previous studies showing impairments of early social orienting behavior, these data also support the use of the domestic chick model to investigate the neurobiological mechanisms potentially involved in early ASD symptoms.
35368925|a|Early detection of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is highly beneficial to the health sustainability of children. Existing detection methods depend on the assessment of experts, which are subjective and costly. In this study, we proposed a machine learning approach that fuses physiological data (electroencephalography, EEG) and behavioral data (eye fixation and facial expression) to detect children with ASD. Its implementation can improve detection efficiency and reduce costs. First, we used an innovative approach to extract features of eye fixation, facial expression, and EEG data. Then, a hybrid fusion approach based on a weighted naive Bayes algorithm was presented for multimodal data fusion with a classification accuracy of 87.50%. Results suggest that the machine learning classification approach in this study is effective for the early detection of ASD. Confusion matrices and graphs demonstrate that eye fixation, facial expression, and EEG have different discriminative powers for the detection of ASD and typically developing children, and EEG may be the most discriminative information. The physiological and behavioral data have important complementary characteristics. Thus, the machine learning approach proposed in this study, which combines the complementary information, can significantly improve classification accuracy.
35368691|a|The 16p13.11 microdeletion, whose prevalence in the general population is about 0.04%, is known in literature as a predisposition factor to neurodevelopmental disorders, being found in about 0.13% of patients with schizophrenia, in 0.5-0.6% of patient with epilepsy, cognitive impairment, autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and aggressiveness. The goal of this study was to identify a specific gene set pattern unique for the affected patients in comparison with other familial components. Due to the incomplete penetrance of this copy number variant (CNV), we studied by whole exome sequencing (WES), with particular regard of 850 SFARI genes, three families with an affected member carrier of inherited 16p13.11 and 16p13.11p12.3 microdeletion and one family with an affected member with a de novo 16p13.11 microdeletion. By combining a deductive approach together with personalized network models, we identified gene signatures potentially capable of explaining the clinical phenotype. Candidate variants in genes of interest were identified as possibly involved in determining the neurological phenotype of the four patients, such as compound heterozygosity in CECR2, variants in MTOR and RICTOR genes, compound heterozygous single nucleotide variants in the LRRK2 gene. Moreover, genes present in the microdeletion region were partially present as central nodes, with a focus on NDE1. No additional pathogenetic or uncertain CNVs were found in all four patients. No significant variants were detected in genes included in the microdeletion in patients 1, 2 and 3, excluding the finding of unmasked recessive variants. In conclusion, WES is a fundamental tool in the genetic investigation of patients having a predisposing variant, which is not sufficient to define the clinical phenotype. Moreover, the analysis of WES data using Systems medicine tools, such as personalized network models, led to the prioritization of genes on a high throughput scale and to discover variants in genes that were not prioritized at first.
35368544|a|Among the factors that influence the quality of life of people with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), physical activity and sport are key dimensions of physical well-being. Few studies take into account the perspectives of people with ASD in order to understand the extent of physical well-being and their subjective perception of it. The development of a system of quality of life indicators related to physical activity and sport for people with ASD and their analysis is the aim of this study, providing guidelines for improvement. A study was carried out with a sample of 276 people, professionals (n = 143), family members (n = 73) and people with ASD (n = 60). The people with ASD in the sample belonged to three age categories: children aged 8-12 years, adolescents aged 12-18 years and adults over 18 years. The research team used a qualitative methodology in the collection of information. They adapted three questionnaires, with validated quality of life scales, to guide the interviews and also applied them in the design of the focus group protocols. Subsequently, the research team analysed the information collected in the focus groups with families and professionals using a DELPHI method. A system for coding the responses and qualitative analysis of the responses was also prepared for the analysis of the data by the research team. Finally, the information obtained was compared with a group of representative experts. The results concluded with the elaboration of a system of quality of life indicators related to the dimension of physical well-being, as well as guidelines and proposals that bring together the perspectives of people with ASD in relation to the practice of sport and physical activity. There is a need to increase the practice of sport among people with ASD in order to promote their health, social participation and personal satisfaction. It is concluded that it is not possible to obtain a broad picture of the quality of life of people with ASD and their families due to lack of information. However, the method and the results obtained represent a first approach at national level to increase knowledge about the quality of life of people with ASD.
35368370|a|
35367909|a|OBJECTIVE/BACKGROUND: Sleep problems are common in people on the autism spectrum. This study reviews one detailed approach to querying the electronic health record (EHR) in a large tertiary care center. PATIENTS/METHODS: We developed methods for identifying people on the autism spectrum and defined their sleep problems using the key words, "sleep" or "melatonin", or International Classification of Diseases (ICD) codes. We examined treatment responses of these individuals to melatonin supplementation. RESULTS: Sleep problems were documented in 86% of patients with ages ranging from 6 to 30 years old. Our specific keyword search yielded more patients with sleep diagnoses than ICD codes alone. About two-thirds of patients who received melatonin supplementation reported benefit from its use. CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides a framework for using deidentified medical records to characterize sleep, a common co-occurring condition, in people on the autism spectrum. Using specific keywords could be helpful in future work that queries the EHR.
35367807|a|BACKGROUND: To prevent the spread of Coronavirus-19 a complete lockdown was enforced in India by March, 2020. The lockdown led to drastic negative effects on the social and communicative life of people. Among these, children and adolescents have been majorly affected. The study aims to investigate the effect of lockdown on Indian children with Autism. METHODS AND PROCEDURES: Thirty parents of children with Autism were given questionnaires to rate the performance of their children, pre- and post-lockdown. The questionnaires were analysed for development across activities of daily living (ADL), language and behavioral characteristics along with school and therapy performance. OUTCOME AND RESULTS: The results revealed a significant regression in performance of children post-lockdown which was evident across all the domains assessed. Various additional issues like changes in sleep patterns, inadequate sitting behavior, attention span, concentration, limited eye contact, mood swings, laziness, clumsiness, hyperactivity and impulsivity were also noted post-lockdown, which were not very prominent before lockdown. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: The study anticipates to help be better prepared for such situations in future. This includes involvement of better intervention which includes home-based training strategies for these children. Moreover, the study highlights impact of online therapy and schooling for children with Autism.
35367590|a|POGZ is a pogo transposable element derived protein with multiple zinc finger domains. Many de novo loss-of-function (LoF) variants of the POGZ gene are associated with autism and other neurodevelopmental disorders. However, the role of POGZ in human cortical development remains poorly understood. Here we generated multiple POGZ LoF lines in H9 human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) using CRISPR/CAS9 genome editing. These lines were then differentiated into neural structures, similar to those found in early to mid-fetal human brain, a critical developmental stage for studying disease mechanisms of neurodevelopmental disorders. We found that the loss of POGZ reduced neural stem cell proliferation in excitatory cortex-patterned neural rosettes, structures analogous to the cortical ventricular zone in human fetal brain. As a result, fewer intermediate progenitor cells and early born neurons were generated. In addition, neuronal migration from the apical center to the basal surface of neural rosettes was perturbed due to the loss of POGZ. Furthermore, cortical-like excitatory neurons derived from multiple POGZ homozygous knockout lines exhibited a more simplified dendritic architecture compared to wild type lines. Our findings demonstrate how POGZ regulates early neurodevelopment in the context of human cells, and provide further understanding of the cellular pathogenesis of neurodevelopmental disorders associated with POGZ variants.
35367500|a|BACKGROUND: Current DSM and ICD classifications of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) exclude emotional dysregulation (ED) in their diagnostic criteria, despite ED symptoms frequently co-occurring in ADHD and likely sharing common neurobiological substrates. In this study, we examined whether consideration of ED symptoms could delineate more informative "ADHD+ED" subphenotypes. METHOD: 4106 children with ADHD were recruited. ED and inattentive (IA) and hyperactive/impulsive (HI) symptoms were profiled using latent class analyses (LCA). The derived latent class (LC) subphenotypes were evaluated and validated in relation to comorbidity patterns, executive functions, and functional impairments. RESULTS: Five LC subphenotypes with ED symptoms were identified: IA/HI + ED profile (LC1); HI + ED profile (LC2); IA + ED profile (LC3); IA/HI profile (LC4); and IA profile (LC5). Cross-validation of the LCA model using support vector machine analysis confirmed 83% accuracy. ED positive (ED+ve) subphenotypes were associated with higher rates of oppositional defiant disorder, mood disorders, anxiety disorders, as well as more severe autistic traits and sluggish cognitive tempo symptoms. Higher rates of ecological executive functioning impairments (BRIEF ratings) were found among ED+ve subphenotypes (though no differences were detected by laboratory-based measures). Functional impairments were also more severe among participants with ED+ve subphenotypes. LIMITATIONS: The data for our LCA were cross-sectional and based primarily on parent ratings. CONCLUSION: Our classification model has parcellated IA, HI, and ED symptoms into novel informative subphenotypes. These classifications provide preliminary evidence that ED symptoms could serve as sentinel features to identify a potential "ADHD-complex" syndrome, which demarcates a more pervasive condition of greater severity, complexity, and impairment.
35367106|a|INTRODUCTION: Cesarean section and induced deliveries have increased substantially in the U.S., coinciding with increases in autism spectrum disorder. Studies have documented associations between cesarean section deliveries and autism spectrum disorder but have not comprehensively accounted for medical risks. This study evaluates the extent to which cesarean section and induced deliveries are associated with autism spectrum disorder in low-risk births. METHODS: In this retrospective cohort study, California's birth records (1992-2012) were linked to hospital discharge records to identify low-risk births using a stringent algorithm based on Joint Commission guidelines. Autism spectrum disorder status was based on California Department of Developmental Service data. Logistic regression models were used to estimate associations between autism spectrum disorder and induced vaginal deliveries, cesarean section deliveries not following induction, and cesarean section deliveries following induction, with noninduced vaginal deliveries as the reference category. RESULTS: A total of 1,488,425 low-risk births took place in California from 1992 to 2012. The adjusted odds of autism spectrum disorder were 7% higher for induced vaginal deliveries (AOR=1.07, 95% CI=1.01, 1.14), 26% higher for cesarean section deliveries not following induction (AOR=1.26, 95% CI=1.19, 1.33), and 31% higher for cesarean section deliveries following induction (AOR=1.31, 95% CI=1.18, 1.45) than for noninduced vaginal deliveries. Lower gestational age and neonatal morbidities did not appear to be important underlying pathways. The associations were insensitive to alternative model specifications and across subpopulations. These results suggest that, in low-risk pregnancies, up to 10% of autism spectrum disorder cases are potentially preventable by avoiding cesarean section deliveries. CONCLUSIONS: After accounting for medical risks, elective deliveries-particularly cesarean section deliveries-were associated with a substantially increased risk of autism spectrum disorder.
35367047|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by substantial clinical and biological heterogeneity. Quantitative and individualized metrics for delineating the heterogeneity of brain structure in ASD are still lacking. Likewise, the extent to which brain structural metrics of ASD deviate from typical development (TD) and whether deviations can be used for parsing brain structural phenotypes of ASD is unclear. METHODS: T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging data from the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE) II (nTD = 564) were used to generate a normative model to map brain structure deviations of ABIDE I subjects (nTD = 560, nASD = 496). Voxel-based morphometry was used to compute gray matter volume. Non-negative matrix factorization was employed to decompose the gray matter matrix into 6 factors and weights. These weights were used for normative modeling to estimate the factor deviations. Then, clustering analysis was used to identify ASD subtypes. RESULTS: Compared with TD, ASD showed increased weights and deviations in 5 factors. Three subtypes with distinct neuroanatomical deviation patterns were identified. ASD subtype 1 and subtype 3 showed positive deviations, whereas ASD subtype 2 showed negative deviations. Distinct clinical manifestations in social communication deficits were identified among the three subtypes. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that individuals with ASD have heterogeneous deviation patterns in brain structure. The results highlight the need to test for subtypes in neuroimaging studies of ASD. This study also presents a framework for understanding neuroanatomical heterogeneity in this increasingly prevalent neurodevelopmental disorder.
35366839|a|BACKGROUND: There is significant variability in clinical pathways available in the diagnostic assessment of ASD, including the order and timing of allied health assessments in relation to paediatrician consultations. Allied health professionals in first-contact models are increasingly used to improve the timeliness of healthcare access, whilst complementing medical specialty workforce shortages. Anecdotally, the implementation of allied health first-contact models in paediatrics has improved waitlists and timely access to healthcare. However, no rigorous studies have been conducted to evaluate the outcomes of these models. This study aims to determine the impacts of an allied health first-contact model on health service use and costs and patient quality of life and satisfaction. METHODS: An open, semi-blinded, multi-centre randomised controlled trial in paediatric outpatient clinics at two Australian metropolitan public hospitals. 56 children (0-16 years) fulfilling the inclusion criteria will be randomised to one of two clinical pathways for assessment of ASD: (1) allied health first-contact or (2) medical first-contact model. Cost outcomes will be collected from both health service and family perspectives. Caregiver-reported outcome measures include: Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory (PedsQL), the EuroQOL Five Dimension Youth Version (EQ-5D-Y), the Autism Family Experience Questionnaire (AFEQ) and Measure of Processes of Care. DISCUSSION: Evidence of improvements in service and consumer centric outcomes will help inform the development and implementation of high-value, evidenced based models of care for the assessment of ASD in children. The findings from this study are expected to contribute to the evidence base around the costs and consequences of allied health first contact models for the assessment of children with ASD in the Australian setting. Findings of this study may help to inform the allocation of health care resources while maintaining, or potentially improving, patient and family quality of life and experience of care. These findings may be useful in informing the wider adoption of these models in Australia and internationally, particularly in healthcare settings where medical specialist shortages exist. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Australia and New Zealand Clinical Trials Register (ANZCTR) ACTRN12621001433897 . Registered: 25th October, 2021.
35366331|a|AIM: To examine the association between perinatal adversities and neurodevelopmental outcome in tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC). METHOD: The Tuberous Sclerosis 2000 study is a prospective, longitudinal UK study of TSC. In phase 1, mutation type, TSC family history, tuber characteristics, presence of cardiac rhabdomyomas, seizure characteristics, and intellectual ability were assessed in 125 children affected with TSC (64 females, 61 males; median age 39mo, range 4-254). In phase 2, 88 participants (49 females, 39 males; median age 148mo, range 93-323) were assessed for neurodevelopmental outcomes including intellectual ability, autism spectrum disorder, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Perinatal histories of 88 participants with TSC and 80 unaffected siblings were collected retrospectively using the Obstetric Enquiry Schedule and coded with a modified Gillberg Optimality Scale to measure levels of perinatal adversity. Data were analysed using Mann-Whitney U tests, Spearman's rank correlation, and linear regression with robust standard errors. RESULTS: Children with familial TSC experienced significantly greater perinatal adversity than unaffected siblings. Perinatal adversity was higher in children with TSC-affected mothers than those with unaffected mothers. There was no significant association between perinatal adversities and neurodevelopmental outcomes after controlling for confounders. INTERPRETATION: Maternal TSC is a significant marker of elevated perinatal risk in addition to risks incurred by fetal genotype. Pregnancies complicated by maternal or fetal TSC require higher vigilance, and mechanisms underlying increased perinatal adversity require further research.
35366173|a|
35365959|a|AIM: Social functioning is influenced by various factors. Autistic traits could be one of the factors that affect social functioning. METHODS: In the present study, the relationship between autistic traits and social functioning among 755 healthy individuals was analyzed. Autistic traits were assessed with the autism-spectrum quotient. Social functioning was assessed by the social functioning scale and the social activity assessment. RESULTS: The Autism-Spectrum Quotient total score was significantly negatively correlated with the social functioning scale total and all subscales of the social functioning scale. All subscales of the Autism-Spectrum Quotient except attention to detail were significantly negatively correlated with the social functioning scale total score. However, the Autism-Spectrum Quotient was not correlated with the social activity assessment, which indicates labor functioning. CONCLUSION: Autistic traits of healthy individuals had a negative impact on situations in real life through social functioning for daily life-sustaining. The effect was not enough to affect labor functioning as indicated by working hours in healthy individuals. These findings should also be examined in individuals with autism spectrum disorder in future studies.
35365868|a|BACKGROUND: Children born to migrant parents have higher rates of language difficulties, intellectual disability, and autism. This study explores the relationship between migration, ethnicity and reasons for early years referrals to community paediatrics in a diverse multi-cultural population in a city in south west England. METHODS: Observational retrospective study from a community paediatric service serving a multi-cultural urban population from June 2012 to February 2016. We tested associations of ethnicity and parental birth origin with reason for referral (developmental or non-developmental) for children under five years old and estimated crude rate ratios for referrals using population census data. RESULTS: Data were available for 514 children (52% white or mixed race, 16% Asian, 21% African diaspora, and 11.5% Somali); 53% had two UK-born parents while 22% had two migrant (non-UK-born) parents. Referrals were for developmental reasons in 307 (60%) including 86 for possible autism. Parental birth origin and ethnicity were associated with reason for referral (p<0.001). Children from African diaspora, Asian or Somali backgrounds had more than twice the rate (rate ratio (RR) 2.37, 95% CI 1.88-2.99, p<0.001) of developmental referrals compared with white or mixed-race children. Children of Somali or African diaspora ethnicity were, respectively, six-times (RR 5.99, 95% CI 3.24-10.8, p<0.001) and four-times (RR 4.23, 95% CI 2.44-7.29, p<0.001) more likely to be referred for possible autism spectrum than their white or mixed-race peers. Developmental referral as a proportion of all referrals was twice as high among children with one migrant parent (20.4%) and three times as high among children with two migrant parents (29.5%), compared with children whose parents were both UK-born (10.7%). CONCLUSIONS: This study supports the importance of ethnicity and parental migration as factors in young children experiencing developmental difficulties, especially concerns about social communication or autism.
35365807|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a prevalent and poorly understood neurodevelopmental disorder. There are currently no laboratory-based diagnostic tests to detect ASD, nor are there any disease-modifying medications that effectively treat ASD's core behavioral symptoms. Scientific progress has been impeded, in part, by overreliance on model organisms that fundamentally lack the sophisticated social and cognitive abilities essential for modeling ASD. We therefore saw significant value in studying naturally low-social rhesus monkeys to model human social impairment, taking advantage of a large outdoor-housed colony for behavioral screening and biomarker identification. Careful development and validation of our animal model, combined with a strong commitment to evaluating the translational utility of our preclinical findings directly in patients with ASD, yielded a robust neurochemical marker (cerebrospinal fluid vasopressin concentration) of trans-primate social impairment and a first-in-class medication (intranasal vasopressin) shown in a small phase 2a pilot trial to improve social abilities in children with ASD. This translational research approach stands to advance our understanding of ASD in a manner not readily achievable with existing animal models, and can be adapted to investigate a variety of other human brain disorders which currently lack valid preclinical options, thereby streamlining translation and amplifying clinical impact more broadly.
35365802|a|The cellular mechanisms of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are poorly understood. Cumulative evidence suggests that abnormal synapse function underlies many features of this disease. Astrocytes regulate several key neuronal processes, including the formation of synapses and the modulation of synaptic plasticity. Astrocyte abnormalities have also been identified in the postmortem brain tissue of ASD individuals. However, it remains unclear whether astrocyte pathology plays a mechanistic role in ASD, as opposed to a compensatory response. To address this, we combined stem cell culturing with transplantation techniques to determine disease-specific properties inherent to ASD astrocytes. We demonstrate that ASD astrocytes induce repetitive behavior as well as impair memory and long-term potentiation when transplanted into the healthy mouse brain. These in vivo phenotypes were accompanied by reduced neuronal network activity and spine density caused by ASD astrocytes in hippocampal neurons in vitro. Transplanted ASD astrocytes also exhibit exaggerated Ca2+ fluctuations in chimeric brains. Genetic modulation of evoked Ca2+ responses in ASD astrocytes modulates behavior and neuronal activity deficits. Thus, this study determines that astrocytes derived from ASD iPSCs are sufficient to induce repetitive behavior as well as cognitive deficit, suggesting a previously unrecognized primary role for astrocytes in ASD.
35365720|a|Hundreds of genes have been associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), including loss-of-function mutations in chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 8 (Chd8). Environmental factors also are implicated in autism risk and have the potential to exacerbate phenotypes in genetically sensitized backgrounds. Here we investigate transcriptional and behavioral phenotypes in a Chd8 haploinsufficient (Chd8V986*/+) mouse line exposed to the pesticide deltamethrin (DM) from conception to postnatal day 22. Vehicle-exposed Chd8V986*/+ mice displayed ASD-associated phenotypes, including anxiety-like behavior and altered sociability, replicating a previous study with this mouse line. A core set of genes was altered in Chd8V986*/+ mice at multiple ages, including Usp11, Wars2, Crlf2, and Eglf6, and proximity ligation data indicated direct binding of CHD8 to the 5' region of these genes. Moreover, oligodendrocyte and neurodegenerative transcriptional phenotypes were apparent in 12 and 18 month old Chd8V986*/+ mice. Following DM exposure, the mutant mice displayed an exacerbated phenotype in the elevated plus maze, and genes associated with vascular endothelial cells were downregulated in the cerebral cortex of older Chd8V986*/+ animals. Our study reveals a gene x environment interaction with a Chd8 haploinsufficient mouse line and points to the importance of investigating phenotypes in ASD animal models across the lifespan.
35365601|a|microRNA-592 (miR-592) has been linked to neurogenesis, but the influence of miR-592 knockout in vivo remains unknown. Here, we report that miR-592 knockout represses IPC-to-mature neuron transition, impairs motor coordination and reduces social interaction. Combining the RNA-seq and tandem mass tagging-based quantitative proteomics analysis (TMT protein quantification) and luciferase reporter assays, we identified MeCP2 as the direct targetgene of miR-592 in the mouse cortex. In Tg(MECP2) mice, lipofection of miR-592 efficiently reduced MECP2 expression in the brains of Tg(MECP2) mice at E14.5. Furthermore, treatment with miR-592 partially ameliorated the autism-like phenotypes observed in adult Tg(MECP2) mice. The findings demonstrate that miR-592 might play a novel role in treating the neurodevelopmental-associated disorder.
35365209|a|BACKGROUND: The present umbrella review evaluated risk factors prior to conception associated with placental abruption based on meta-analyses and systematic reviews. METHODS: We searched PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science until June 25, 2021. All meta-analyses that had focused on assessing the risk factors associated with placental abruption were included. We calculated summary effect estimates, 95% CI, heterogeneity I2, 95% prediction interval, small-study effects, excess significance biases, and sensitive analysis. The quality of the meta-analyses was evaluated with A Measurement Tool to Assess Systematic Reviews 2 (AMSTAR 2). RESULTS: There was no risk factor in the present umbrella review with the high level of evidence (class I or II). Eight risk factors including maternal asthma (RR 1.29 95% CI 1.14, 1.47), prior cesarean section (RR 1.38, 95% CI 1.35-1.42), cocaine using (RR 4.55, 95% CI 1.78-6.50), endometriosis (OR 1.40, 95% CI 1.12-1.76), chronic hypertension (OR 3.13, 95% CI 2.04-4.80), advanced maternal age (OR 1.44, 95% CI 1.35-1.54), maternal smoking (OR 1.80, 95% CI 1.75-1.85) (RR 1.65, 95% CI 1.51-1.80), and use of assisted reproductive techniques (ART) (OR 1.87, 95% CI 1.70-2.06) were graded as suggestive evidence (class III). The other four risk factors including pre-pregnancy underweight (OR 1.38, 95% CI 1.12-1.70), preeclampsia (OR 1.73, 95% CI 1.47-2.04), uterine leiomyoma (OR 2.63, 95% CI 1.38-3.88), and marijuana use (OR 1.78, 95% CI 1.32-2.40) were graded as risk factors with weak evidence (class IV). CONCLUSION: Maternal asthma, prior cesarean section, cocaine use, endometriosis, chronic hypertension, advanced maternal age, maternal smoking, and use of ART, pre-pregnancy underweight, preeclampsia, uterine leiomyoma, and marijuana use were risk factors associated with placental abruption. Although factors associated with placental abruption have been investigated, the current meta-analytic associations cannot disentangle the complex etiology of placental abruption mainly due to their low quality of evidence.
35364647|a|BACKGROUND: Rett syndrome is a rare genetic neurological syndrome that affects mostly females. The syndrome leads to severe impairments impacting all areas of the affected persons' life, including speech, mobility, eating, and breathing impairments. The most distinct symptoms include stereotyped hand movements, ataxia, and atrophy of the lower limbs, and signs of autism. METHODS: According to the principle of convenience sampling, the quantitative research included five females diagnosed with Rett syndrome subject to their personalized goal oriented neurological physiotherapy. Changes in gross motor function were assessed by the Gross Motor Function Measure 88 and Rett syndrome Gross Motor Scale. RESULTS: It was found that the 12-month multifaceted neurological physiotherapy intervention had statistically significant improvements in both Gross Motor Function Measure 88 (p = 0.005) and Rett syndrome Gross Motor Scale (p = 0.012). Despite positive improvements, the absence of control group made it difficult for a comparative evaluation to determine what interventions had the best possible outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: The quantitative research demonstrates neuro-developmental treatment sessions, hippotherapy, hydrotherapy, physical therapy, a walking program, endurance exercises, active-assisted exercises, and coordination exercises, had a significant impact on improving gross motor function status. Current multifaceted intervention program leads to good improvement of gross motor skills above what can be expected from late motor deterioration.
35364333|a|OBJECTIVE: Serious games are a promising means of fostering socio-emotional skills in children on the autism spectrum (AS). However, empathy and related constructs have not yet been addressed comprehensively and together with emotion recognition, and there is a lack of randomized controlled trials (RCT) to investigate skill maintenance and the transfer to functional behavior. METHOD: The manualized, parent-assisted serious game Zirkus Empathico (ZE) was tested against an active control group, in a six-week multicenter RCT. Eighty-two children aged 5-10 years on the AS were assessed at baseline, post-treatment, and three-month follow-up. Empathy and emotion recognition skills were defined as the primary outcomes. The secondary outcomes included measures of emotional awareness, emotion regulation, autism social symptomatology (Social Responsiveness Scale), and subjective therapy goals. RESULTS: Training effects were observed after the intervention for empathy (d = 0.71) and emotion recognition (d = 0.50), but not at follow-up. Moderate effects on emotional awareness, emotion regulation, and autism social symptomatology were indicated by the short and mid-term assessments. Parents reported treatment goal attainment and positive training transfer. CONCLUSION: While a six-week training with ZE failed to induce lasting changes in empathy and emotion recognition, it may be effective for improving emotional awareness and emotion regulation, and mitigate general autism symptomatology. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION INFORMATION: Zirkus Empathico - Promoting socioemotional competencies in 5- to 10-year-old children with autism spectrum conditions using a computer-based training program; https://www.drks.de/; DRKS-ID: DRKS00009337; Universal Trial Number (UTN): U1111-1175-5451.
35363298|a|
35363297|a|
35363296|a|
35363295|a|BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Autistic children and children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) may have more frequent visits to the emergency department (ED). We aim to identify the primary reasons for ED visits among autistic children and children with ADHD, compared to a random sample of visits. METHODS: Using 2008 to 2017 Nationwide Emergency Department Sample data, we assessed the most frequent primary diagnoses for ED visits among children (ages 3-12 and 13-18 years, separately) (1) with an autism diagnosis, (2) with ADHD, and (3) a random sample (1 000 000 visits). We regressed primary reasons for visits on autism or ADHD diagnosis, controlling for individual characteristics, to assess the odds of presenting for these reasons. RESULTS: Although the 10 most frequent diagnoses among the random sample were physical health conditions, autistic children and children with ADHD often presented for psychiatric conditions. Older children with autism and with ADHD more frequently presented for mood disorders (10%-15% of visits; odds ratios [ORs] = 5.2-8.5) and intentional self-harm (ORs = 3.2-5.0). Younger children with ADHD more commonly presented with mood disorders (6.6% of visits; OR = 18.3) and younger autistic children more often presented with attention-deficit, conduct, and disruptive behavior disorders (9.7% of visits; OR = 9.7). CONCLUSIONS: Autistic children and children with ADHD have higher odds of presenting to the ED for psychiatric conditions than a random sample, including for self-harm. Clinicians should treat these populations sensitively, recognize and assess the risk for self-harm, and facilitate continuing psychiatric care.
35363294|a|
35363293|a|OBJECTIVES: Physical and mental health outcomes of autistic individuals deteriorate during transition to adulthood. The study aims to identify opportunities to improve physician knowledge in health-care transitions (HCT) for autistic individuals by understanding perceived versus experienced facilitators and barriers in overall HCT curriculum implementation in graduate medical education. METHODS: Medicine-Pediatrics program directors participated in a Health Care Transition Residency Curriculum Collaborative Improvement Network and used an iterative process to develop and improve HCT curricula. Pre- and postcollaborative semistructured interviews were administered to program directors. The study occurred over 9 months (July 2018-February 2019). Recurring interview themes were analyzed utilizing Dedoose qualitative coding software and presented utilizing percentages and proportions. RESULTS: Most program directors developed curricula in response to a gap in their current transition curricula. All program directors partially or completely met their goals during the collaborative. The most common types of curricular delivery were didactic (65%) and clinical experience-based (53%). Some tested unique delivery platforms, like the electronic medical record system (29%) and online modules (24%). Program directors often involved residents in the curricular development process and overwhelmingly (65%) felt this was a major facilitator. Competing priorities of faculty (71%) and of residents (53%) were the most common barriers. CONCLUSIONS: Gaps in HCT curricula delivery were primarily attributed to suboptimal health care systems where training occurs, though existing clinical experiences and diverse learning modalities were successfully leveraged. Using a quality improvement framework and actively engaging resident trainees in curriculum development were successful strategies programs used in the development of HCT curricula.
35363292|a|
35363290|a|OBJECTIVES: In the United States, autistic individuals experience disproportionate physical and mental health challenges relative to non-autistic individuals, including higher rates of co-occurring and chronic conditions and lower physical, social, and psychological health-related quality of life. The Autism Intervention Research Network on Physical Health (AIR-P) is an interdisciplinary, multicenter research network for scientific collaboration and infrastructure that aims to increase the life expectancy and quality of life for autistic individuals, with a focus on underserved or vulnerable populations. The current paper describes the development of the AIR-P Research Agenda. METHODS: Development of the research agenda involved an iterative and collaborative process between the AIR-P Advisory Board, Steering Committee, and Autistic Researcher Review Board. The methodology consisted of 3 phases: (1) ideation and design, (2) literature review and synthesis; and (3) network engagement. RESULTS: Six core research priorities related to the health of autistic individuals were identified: (1) primary care services and quality, (2) community-based lifestyle interventions, (3) health systems and services, (4) gender, sexuality, and reproductive health, (5) neurology, and (6) genetics. Specific topics within each of these priorities were identified. Four cross-cutting research priorities were also identified: (1) neurodiversity-oriented care, (2) facilitating developmental transitions, (3) methodologically rigorous intervention studies, and (4) addressing health disparities. CONCLUSIONS: The AIR-P Research Agenda represents an important step forward for enacting large-scale health-promotion efforts for autistic individuals across the lifespan. This agenda will catalyze autism research in historically underrepresented topic areas while adopting a neurodiversity-oriented approach to health-promotion.
35363289|a|BACKGROUND: Autistic young adults (YAs) often live with family and present with complex health needs. Adults with developmental disabilities (DDs) who live with family are the least likely to receive preventive health care compared with residents of other settings. No published studies have examined intersectionality between age, race or ethnicity, household income, and health needs in health care access for autistic YA. This study explored health care access among autistic YAs receiving state DD services compared with other age and disability groups. METHODS: We analyzed data from the National Core Indicator's Adult Family Survey of families of DD service users ages 18 and older who lived in the respondent's home. We used bivariate analyses and multivariable logistic regression to examine family-reported access to health care providers when needed, the role of sociodemographics, and the complexity of health care needs in predicting consistent care. RESULTS: Approximately 70% of autistic YAs had consistent access to health care when needed, similar to autistic adults but at lower rates than those with other disabilities. Odds of consistent health care access were higher among autistic YAs who were Black or lived in a rural area and lower among those with co-occurring health conditions or who needed extensive personal care support. CONCLUSIONS: Nearly one-third of autistic YAs who lived with family and receive state DD services had difficulty consistently accessing needed health care. Improved surveillance of health care services in this population is needed in addition to innovations in Medicaid waivers, which fund DD services, to address health needs and support families in accessing care.
35363287|a|BACKGROUND: Addressing health care needs is complex in autistic youth for many reasons. Increased inpatient care that has been noted in this population, particularly for ambulatory care sensitive conditions (ACSCs), may be a marker of inadequate primary and outpatient care. METHODS: This study used data from hospital inpatient discharges from the National Inpatient Sample 2017. The prevalence, average length of stay, and the average cost per day of the 10 most common principal diagnoses for index stay were calculated for autistic youth and youth with mental, behavioral, and other neurodevelopmental disabilities (MBND), ages 0 to 17. RESULTS: Of every 1000 inpatient stays, 7.3 were for autistic youth and 65.2 for youth with MBND. The rate varied by US region and zip code-level household income. The most common diagnosis associated with stays in autistic youth was mood disorders, as in youth with MBND. Nearly all top 10 principal diagnoses for autistic youth were for ACSCs. The highest average cost per day for autistic youth was for physical injuries ($4320 per day), and the longest stays were for schizophrenia (14 days). CONCLUSIONS: High occurrence of ACSCs in autistic youth suggests that primary care may not adequately address health and mental health needs. Clinical complexity and autism characteristics may be impacting care received in the hospital. Additional considerations need to explore and examine care complexity, racial and ethnic disparities, and the large portion of Medicaid-covered youth. Strategies for the provision of care to these vulnerable populations are of great concern.
35363285|a|
35363284|a|
35363282|a|
35363280|a|
35363279|a|
35363171|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a widespread developmental disorder of the nervous system with an unclear etiology and pathogenesis. Its global incidence is currently increasing, and no effective drugs are available to improve its core symptoms. Nonpharmaceutical therapy can effectively relieve the core symptoms of autism, has fewer side effects than drugs, and is easily accepted by patients. This systematic and network meta-analysis aimed to evaluate the impact of non-pharmaceutical therapy on autism to explore preferable therapeutic options for autism. METHODS: Online databases, including the China National Knowledge Infrastructure [CNKI], SinoMed, Wanfang Database [WF], China Science and Technology Journal Database [VIP], MEDLINE, Web of Science, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Library will be searched for randomized controlled trials of nonpharmacological interventions for autism published before October 2021. Two researchers will be independently responsible for the literature screening, data extraction, and quality assessment. Standard paired and Bayesian network meta-analyses will be performed using RevMan 5.3 Software and GEMTC 0.14.3, to compare the efficacy and safety of different nonpharmacological regimens. RESULTS: The results of this systematic and network meta-analysis will be submitted to a peer-reviewed journal for publication. CONCLUSION: This study provides a comprehensive and reliable evidence-based reference for the efficacy and safety of different non-pharmacological interventions for autism. PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD 42021275571.
35363085|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Gender diversity broadly refers to the way in which an individual experiences (expressions and/or identities) their gender distinctly to that which would be expected based upon social norms for their gender assigned at birth. Recent research has shown a higher representation of gender diversity among autistic youth. Previous research in this area has relied on parent-report based on a single question from the Child Behavior Checklist Item-110, asking whether their child "Wishes to be the opposite sex." The Gender Diversity Screening Questionnaire Self-Report and Parent-Report were used to assess the experience of gender diversity in 244 children (140 autism spectrum disorder and 104 typically developing) between 10 and 13 years. The Item-110 was also collected. Results showed that autistic children endorsed much higher rates of Binary Gender Diversity (less identification with their designated sex and more with the other binary sex) and Nonbinary Gender Diversity (identification as neither male nor female) than typically developing children. Similarly, parents of autistic children reported significantly more gender-body incongruence experienced by their child than parents of typically developing children. Specifically, parents of autistic females-assigned-at-birth reported significantly more gender-body incongruence than autistic males-assigned-at-birth. Parent- and self-report measures were largely related. Moreover, statistical comparisons between and within the groups revealed associations between gender profiles and symptoms of anxiety, depression, and suicidality. Results extend previous reports showing increased rates of gender diversity in autistic children, now based on both self-report and parent-report, and highlight the need to better understand and support the unique and complex needs of autistic children who experience gender diversity.
35362802|a|Anxiety is commonly experienced by children on the autism spectrum, and can negatively impact their lives. Family accommodation has been linked to the impact of anxiety on the child's life in non-autistic children. This study tested whether the same relationship holds for children on the autism spectrum. A community sample (n = 118) of parents of children on the spectrum completed questionnaires on their child's autism characteristics and severity and impact of their child's anxiety, their own anxiety and family accommodation behaviours. Family accommodation was associated with the impact of child anxiety, over and above anxiety severity of the child and parent. Findings support the involvement of parents in psychosocial support for children on the autism spectrum experiencing anxiety.
35362340|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Sensory atypicalities are very common among autistic people and are integrated in several theories and explanatory models of autism. Qualitative studies have explored these singular sensory experiences from the perspectives of autistic people themselves. This article gathers all these qualitative studies and provides original findings regarding the everyday sensory experience of autistic people, that is, around four dimensions - physical, emotional, relational and social - experienced holistically, as inseparable, and not hierarchically or in terms of cause and effect. Adopting this holistic view could improve the adaptation of the sensory environment in health care facilities and the training of professionals around this specific issue.
35362336|a|LAY ABSTRACT: This study investigates the effects of a probiotic on preschoolers' brain electrical activity with autism spectrum disorder. Autism is a disorder with an increasing prevalence characterized by an enormous individual, family, and social cost. Although the etiology of autism spectrum disorder is unknown, an interaction between genetic and environmental factors is implicated, converging in altered brain synaptogenesis and, therefore, connectivity. Besides deepening the knowledge on the resting brain electrical activity that characterizes this disorder, this study allows analyzing the positive central effects of a 6-month therapy with a probiotic through a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled study and the correlations between electroencephalography activity and biochemical and clinical parameters. In subjects treated with probiotics, we observed a decrease of power in frontopolar regions in beta and gamma bands, and increased coherence in the same bands together with a shift in frontal asymmetry, which suggests a modification toward a typical brain activity. Electroencephalography measures were significantly correlated with clinical and biochemical measures. These findings support the importance of further investigations on probiotics' benefits in autism spectrum disorder to better elucidate mechanistic links between probiotics supplementation and changes in brain activity.
35362330|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder are neurodevelopmental disorders that often co-occur in children. However, there are few large, nationally representative studies examining the prevalence of co-occurring autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children. The aim of this study was to estimate the prevalence of parent-reported co-occurring autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder in the United States and examine associations between having co-occurring autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and sociodemographic and household factors. Data were analyzed from the 2016-2018 National Survey of Children's Health. A total of 88,051 children aged 3-17 years old were included in the analysis. Statistical analyses were conducted to assess the associations between sociodemographic and household characteristics and current co-occurrence of autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Approximately 1.2% of children (740,816) aged 3-17 years had co-occurring autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Children who were male, older, reported poor health, or had public or combined public and private health insurance were more likely to have co-occurring autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Conversely, children who were Black, non-Hispanic or multi-racial/other, non-Hispanic were less likely to report co-occurring autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder than White non-Hispanics. Findings suggest implementing early developmental screening and surveillance for co-occurring autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and coordinating strategies that optimize early identification and intervention for all children suspected of having co-occurring autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, particularly those from underrepresented groups.
35362329|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Social support can take many forms, such as practical help, time spent socially with others, or the satisfaction with personal relationships. Social support is known to affect quality of life (QoL) in both non-autistic older and autistic young adults. QoL reflects how satisfied an individual is with their life either overall or in a certain area. We know little about middle-aged and older autistic adults' experiences of social support or QoL. In this study, 388 adults aged 40-83 years old, completed online questionnaires asking about background such as age and sex, depression and anxiety symptoms, QoL (physical, psychological, social, environmental, and autism-specific), and different types of social support. Even after taking into account background, depression, and anxiety, social support was important for individuals' QoL. To our knowledge this is the first paper to examine the relationship between social support and QoL in middle-aged and older autistic adults. Improving social support may have a significant impact on the QoL of older autistic adults. Future studies should examine whether age-related changes in social support (size, content, and arrangement of social networks) that are common in non-autistic aging, also occur among older autistic adults.
35362025|a|Prior work has examined associations between cardiometabolic pregnancy complications and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), but not how these complications may relate to social communication traits more broadly. We addressed this question within the Environmental influences on Child Health Outcomes (ECHO) program, with 6,778 participants from 40 cohorts conducted from 1998-2021 with information on ASD-related traits via the Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS). Four metabolic pregnancy complications were examined individually, and combined, in association with SRS scores, using crude and adjusted linear regression as well as quantile regression. We also examined associations stratified by ASD diagnosis, and potential mediation by preterm birth and low birth weight, and modification by child sex and enriched risk of ASD. Increases in ASD-related traits were associated with obesity (ss=4.64, 95% CI 3.27, 6.01) and gestational diabetes (ss=5.21, 95% CI 2.41, 8.02) specifically, but not with hypertension or preeclampsia. Results in children without ASD were similar to main analyses, but weaker among ASD cases. There was not strong evidence for mediation or modification. Results suggest that common cardiometabolic pregnancy complications may influence child ASD-related traits not only above a diagnostic threshold relevant to ASD, but also across the population.
35361784|a|
35361705|a|Recent theories of autism propose that a core deficit in autism would be a less context-sensitive weighting of prediction errors. There is also first support for this hypothesis on an early sensory level. However, an open question is whether this decreased context-sensitivity is caused by faster updating of one's model of the world (i.e. higher weighting of new information), proposed by predictive coding theories, or slower model updating. Here, we differentiated between these two hypotheses by investigating how first impressions shape the mismatch negativity (MMN), reflecting early sensory prediction error processing. An autism and matched control group of human adults (both n=27, 8 female) were compared on the multi-timescale MMN paradigm, in which tones were presented that were either standard (frequently occurring) or deviant (rare), and these roles reversed every block. A well-replicated observation is that the initial model (i.e. the standard and deviant sound in the first block) influences MMN amplitudes in later blocks. If autism is characterized by faster model updating, and thus a smaller primacy bias, we hypothesized (and demonstrate using a simple reinforcement learning model) that their MMN amplitudes should be less influenced by the initial context. In line with this hypothesis, we found that MMN responses in the autism group did not differ between the initial deviant and initial standard sounds as they did in the control group. These findings are consistent with the idea that autism is characterized by faster model updating during early sensory processing, as proposed by predictive coding accounts of autism.Significance statement:Recent theories of autism propose that a core deficit in autism is that they are faster to update their models of the world based on new sensory information. Here, we tested this hypothesis by investigating how first impressions shape brain responses during early sensory processing, and hypothesized that individuals with autism would be less influenced by these first impressions. In line with earlier studies, our results show that early sensory processing was influenced by first impressions in a control group. However, this was not the case in an autism group. This suggests that individuals with autism are faster to abandon their initial model, and is consistent with the proposal that they are faster to update their models of the world.
35361652|a|OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to determine the characteristics of ethical review and recruitment processes, concerning the inclusion of adults with capacity-affecting conditions and associated communication difficulties in ethically sound research, under the provisions of the Mental Capacity Act (MCA, 2005) for England and Wales. DESIGN: A documentary-based survey was conducted focusing on adults with capacity-affecting conditions and associated communication difficulties. The survey investigated: (1) retrospective studies during the implementation period of the MCA (2007-2017); (2) prospective applications to MCA-approved Research Ethics Committees (RECs) during a 12-month period (2018-19); (3) presentational and linguistic content of participant information sheets used with this population. SETTING: Studies conducted and approved in England and Wales. SAMPLE: Studies focused on adults with the following capacity-affecting conditions: acquired brain injury; aphasia after stroke; autism; dementia; intellectual disabilities; mental health conditions. The sample comprised: (1) 1605 studies; (2) 83 studies; (3) 25 participant information sheets. PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary outcome was the inclusion/exclusion of adults with capacity-affecting conditions from studies. The secondary outcome was the provisions deployed to support their inclusion. RESULTS: The retrospective survey showed an incremental rise in research applications post-MCA implementation from 2 (2012) to 402 (2017). The prospective survey revealed exclusions of people on the bases of: 'lack of capacity' (n=21; 25%); 'communication difficulties' (n=5; 6%); 'lack of consultee' (n=11; 13%); and 'limited English' (n=17; 20%). REC recommendations focused mainly on participant-facing documentation. The participant information sheets were characterised by inconsistent use of images, typography and layout, volume of words and sentences; some simplified language content, but variable readability scores. CONCLUSIONS: People with capacity-affecting conditions and associated communication difficulties continue to be excluded from research, with recruitment efforts largely concentrated around participant-facing documentation. There is a need for a more nuanced approach if such individuals are to be included in ethically sound research.
35361232|a|OBJECTIVE: To interpret the current evidence on the prevalence of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) through a systematic review based on both DSM-5 (2013) and PRISMA criteria. METHOD: Empirical studies complying with the PRISMA guidelines were identified from four databases (PubMed, Scopus, Science Direct, and ProQuest) and systematically reviewed. In total, 17 articles were selected for the study. RESULTS: In the scientific literature, there have been only a few studies measuring the prevalence of NDDs according to the DSM-5 (2013) criteria in people under 18 years old. The reported prevalence rates were as follows: intellectual disability (ID), 0.63%; attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 5-11%; autism spectrum disorder (ASD), 0.70-3%; specific learning disorder (SLD), 3-10%; communication disorders (CDs), 1-3.42%; and motor disorders (MDs), 0.76-17%. Although there is extensive literature on specific disorders, NDDs have rarely been assessed as a whole. All of the reviewed studies support the idea that such disorders can be considered chronic, heterogeneous, underdiagnosed conditions and that comorbidity of multiple NDDs is the norm. Likewise, it is estimated that the prevalence of the most studied disorders, such as ADHD, ASD and SLD, remains stable over time and is consistent in different cultures, ages, ethnicities and sexes. CONCLUSION: The studies reviewed lead us to conclude that the prevalence rate of NDDs fluctuates globally between 4.70 and 88.50%; these variations depend on methodological aspects such as estimation procedures, as well as on sociocontextual phenomena. It is also important to consider that the prevalence found is probably highly influenced by the activity of the countries in the diagnosis and training of professionals who care for children and adolescents. Hence, there is a need for a secondary intervention in the fields of public health and education to minimize socioemotional consequences, prevent academic failure, and reduce the economic cost to society.
35360599|a|Debate surrounding the validity of the method of supported typing known as facilitated communication (FC) has been continuous since its inception in the 1990s. Views are polarized on whether FC can be considered an authenticated method for use by people with complex communication needs (CCN) or significant challenges in speech, language, and communication. This perspective article presents an analysis of the research arguing for-and against-the use of FC, combined with the lived experience knowledge of autistic adults who utilize FC, to rehabilitate its current standing as discredited and unevidenced. By considering extant qualitative and quantitative studies, as well as personal accounts of the use of this particular Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) method, the authors argue that the current dismissal of FC is rooted in ableist and outdated approaches. FC research should be reconsidered and reconducted using current best practice autism research approaches, including coproduction and a presumption of autistic communication competence, to assess its validity as a potential AAC method for autistic individuals.
35360575|a|The barriers to responsiveness and the initiation of communication are the two key problems encountered by children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Prior interventions based on behavioral reinforcement have had an obvious effect on responsive communication but a weak effect on the initiation of communication. Based on psychological development theory, we designed ultra-light clay interventions involving hands-on production or multi-interaction around key concepts and themes, teaching children about basic concepts, relationships, and logic, making abstract knowledge concrete and experience. Two studies (Study 1: N = 3, one-to-one intervention; Study 2: N = 8, one-to-two intervention) showed that ultra-light clay intervention improved both the initiation of and response to communication among children with ASD, but that such improvements show a peer-generalization effect in initiation communication, not in responsive communication. These findings provide a set of ultra-light clay interventions for communication in children with ASD and suggest a relationship between endogenous interventions and the initiation of communication.
35360172|a|Studying functional brain connectivity plays an important role in understanding how human brain functions and neuropsychological diseases such as autism, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is one of the most popularly used tool to construct functional brain connectivity. However, the presence of noises and outliers in fMRI blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signals might lead to unreliable and unstable results in the construction of connectivity matrix. In this paper, we propose a pipeline that enables us to estimate robust and stable connectivity matrix, which increases the detectability of group differences. In particular, a low-rank plus sparse (L + S) matrix decomposition technique is adopted to decompose the original signals, where the low-rank matrix L recovers the essential common features from regions of interest, and the sparse matrix S catches the sparse individual variability and potential outliers. On the basis of decomposed signals, we construct connectivity matrix using the proposed novel concentration inequality-based sparse estimator. In order to facilitate the comparisons, we also consider correlation, partial correlation, and graphical Lasso-based methods. Hypothesis testing is then conducted to detect group differences. The proposed pipeline is applied to rs-fMRI data in Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative to detect AD-related biomarkers, and we show that the proposed pipeline provides accurate yet more stable results than using the original BOLD signals.
35360134|a|Background: There are numerous observations of reward sensitivity being associated with different psychiatric disorders. Nonetheless, most studies investigating this relationship have been cross-sectional. Additionally, current knowledge is fragmentary as studies often investigate only one disorder at a time. The present study addresses these gaps by investigating whether reward sensitivity at age 13 predicts the course of nine psychopathology domains (attention and hyperactivity, autism spectrum, reactive aggression, proactive aggression, mood, anxiety, smoking, alcohol use, and cannabis use) over a 14-year follow-up period. Methods: We used dimensional outcomes on 2,523 individuals over five measurement waves between ages 13 and 26 of the Dutch Tracking Adolescents' Individual Lives Survey (TRAILS). Reward sensitivity was measured with the Behavioral Activation System (BAS) scale. The longitudinal associations between reward sensitivity and psychopathology were examined using growth curve analysis within a multilevel framework. Results: Reward sensitivity at age 13 was associated with changes in psychopathology over time. Reward sensitivity had a stable main effect on the future course of reactive and proactive aggression problems and anxiety problems. The effect of reward sensitivity increased over time for alcohol and cannabis use. Post-hoc analyses showed that reward sensitivity also had a stable effect on attention problems and hyperactivity and smoking when based on the fun-seeking subscale for both domains and when changing the informant who reported on attention problems and hyperactivity. No evidence was found for a longitudinal association between reward sensitivity and autism spectrum problems and mood problems. Conclusion: The current study provides evidence for the long-lasting effects of reward sensitivity on the course of different domains of psychopathology.
35360118|a|Self-other distinction refers to the ability to distinguish between our own and other people's physical and mental states (actions, perceptions, emotions etc.). Both the right temporo-parietal junction and brain areas associated with the human mirror neuron system are likely to critically influence self-other distinction, given their respective contributions to theory of mind and embodied empathy. The degree of appropriate self-other distinction will vary according to the exact social situation, and how helpful it is to feel into, or remain detached from, another person's mental state. Indeed, the emotional resonance that we can share with others affords the gift of empathy, but over-sharing may pose a downside, leading to a range of difficulties from personal distress to paranoia, and perhaps even motor tics and compulsions. The aim of this perspective paper is to consider how evidence from behavioral and neurophysiological studies supports a role for problems with self-other distinction in a range of psychiatric symptoms spanning the emotional, cognitive and motor domains. The various signs and symptoms associated with problematic self-other distinction comprise both maladaptive and adaptive (compensatory) responses to dysfunction within a common underlying neuropsychological mechanism, compelling the adoption of more holistic transdiagnostic therapeutic approaches within Psychiatry.
35360098|a|There is a growing body of evidence highlighting the significant role of gut microbiota in various pathologies. We performed a systematic review to review the different microbiota involved in neuropsychiatric diseases. 50 studies (23 studies for autism spectrum disorders, 18 for major depression, and 9 for schizophrenia), representing 2,137 patients and 2,844 controls. Concerning the microbiota, the genera Prevotella, Clostridium, Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium, Ruminococcus, Megamonas, and Faecalbacterium were the ones detected with the most frequent variation of their relatives abundance. We also assess the overlap between the different pathologies. This study provides new insights into the complex relationship between the brain and the gut and the implications in neuropsychiatric pathologies. The identification of unique signatures in neuropsychiatric diseases suggests new possibilities in targeted anti or probiotic treatment.
35359647|a|Objective: Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a genetic disease that arises from TSC1 or TSC2 abnormalities and induces the overactivation of the mammalian/mechanistic target of rapamycin pathways. The neurological symptoms of TSC include epilepsy and tuberous sclerosis complex-associated neuropsychiatric disorders (TAND). Although TAND affects TSC patients' quality of life, the specific region in the brain associated with TAND remains unknown. We examined the association between white matter microstructural abnormalities and TAND, using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). Methods: A total of 19 subjects with TSC and 24 age-matched control subjects were enrolled. Tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) were performed to assess group differences in fractional anisotropy (FA) between the TSC and control groups. Atlas-based association analysis was performed to reveal TAND-related white matter in subjects with TSC. Multiple linear regression was performed to evaluate the association between TAND and the DTI parameters; FA and mean diffusivity in seven target regions and projection fibers. Results: The TBSS showed significantly reduced FA in the right hemisphere and particularly in the inferior frontal occipital fasciculus (IFOF), inferior longitudinal fasciculus (ILF), superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF), uncinate fasciculus (UF), and genu of corpus callosum (CC) in the TSC group relative to the control group. In the association analysis, intellectual disability was widely associated with all target regions. In contrast, behavioral problems and autistic features were associated with the limbic system white matter and anterior limb of the internal capsule (ALIC) and CC. Conclusion: The disruption of white matter integrity may induce underconnectivity between cortical and subcortical regions. These findings suggest that TANDs are not the result of an abnormality in a specific brain region, but rather caused by connectivity dysfunction as a network disorder. This study indicates that abnormal white matter connectivity including the limbic system is relevant to TAND. The analysis of brain and behavior relationship is a feasible approach to reveal TAND related white matter and neural networks. TAND should be carefully assessed and treated at an early stage.
35359348|a|Objectives: Neonatal jaundice or hyperbilirubinemia is one of the common findings in neonatal medicine. Severe disease can cause neurological damage and even Kernicterus. Magnesium ion is the most important N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist. The most commonly used treatment for jaundice is phototherapy, but the effect of phototherapy on serum magnesium is less investigated. In this study, we aim to investigate the effects of phototherapy on total serum magnesium levels in icteric neonates. Methods: This prospective cohort study was carried out on 160 neonates with jaundice referring to the Besat Hospital of Hamadan. Based on the bilirubin level, newborns were divided into three subgroups of mild, moderate, and severe disease which were subjected to single, double, and intensive phototherapy, respectively. Serum bilirubin and magnesium levels were measured before and after phototherapy and compared using parametric tests. Results: Subjects have a mean intrauterine age of 38.8 weeks and a jaundice onset age of 3.8 days. In all groups, serum magnesium levels were within the normal range before phototherapy. After phototherapy, on the other hand, the most reduction of total serum magnesium was in the double phototherapy group, which was -0.13 +- 0.42 mg/dl (P = 0.018). The change in serum magnesium level was not significant in the single phototherapy (-0.02 +- 0.25) and intensive phototherapy (-13.55 +- 2.73) groups (P > 0.05). Conclusion: In the present study, serum magnesium did not increase significantly before the treatment in three groups. After treatment, a significant reduction was seen in the double phototherapy group.
35358996|a|
35358829|a|Mutations in the HDAC8 are considered to be a prominent cause of Cornelia de Lange syndrome 5, a leading cause of intellectual disability and social disability. Here, we report the generation of an induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line from a 5-year-old girl diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) who carries a heterozygous mutation in HDAC8 (c.1075C > T, p.Pro359Ser).
35358416|a|Calcium (Ca2+) is a universal second messenger involved in synaptogenesis and cell survival; consequently, its regulation is important for neurons. ATPase plasma membrane Ca2+ transporting 1 (ATP2B1) belongs to the family of ATP-driven calmodulin-dependent Ca2+ pumps that participate in the regulation of intracellular free Ca2+. Here, we clinically describe a cohort of 12 unrelated individuals with variants in ATP2B1 and an overlapping phenotype of mild to moderate global development delay. Additional common symptoms include autism, seizures, and distal limb abnormalities. Nine probands harbor missense variants, seven of which were in specific functional domains, and three individuals have nonsense variants. 3D structural protein modeling suggested that the variants have a destabilizing effect on the protein. We performed Ca2+ imaging after introducing all nine missense variants in transfected HEK293 cells and showed that all variants lead to a significant decrease in Ca2+ export capacity compared with the wild-type construct, thus proving their pathogenicity. Furthermore, we observed for the same variant set an incorrect intracellular localization of ATP2B1. The genetic findings and the overlapping phenotype of the probands as well as the functional analyses imply that de novo variants in ATP2B1 lead to a monogenic form of neurodevelopmental disorder.
35358102|a|OBJECTIVE: Previous studies have reported varying rates of regression in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We sought to (1) determine the rate of clinician-diagnosed regression for young children with ASD and (2) compare developmental functioning and ASD symptoms of children with versus without regression. METHODS: We conducted a retrospective chart review of toddlers (age 18-36 months) with Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-5 ASD. We abstracted cognitive, language, adaptive, and motor functioning standard scores and ASD core symptoms. Regression was defined as "clinician-diagnosed regression accompanied by recommendation for a medical workup." We used propensity scores to match each participant with regression (n = 20) one-to-one with a participant without regression (n = 20). We compared the groups on developmental scores using independent sample t tests and on core ASD symptoms using Pearson's chi2 test. RESULTS: Of the 500 children with ASD, n = 20 (4%) had regression (defined above). Children with regression had lower Bayley cognitive and language scores and lower Vineland adaptive scores compared with those without regression (cognitive: 78.0 vs 85.5, p < 0.05; language: 56.9 vs 68.2, p < 0.01; adaptive: 70.0 vs 80.3; p < 0.01). There was no difference in motor scores across groups. There were no significant differences in the frequency of exhibiting core ASD symptoms for those with versus without regression. CONCLUSION: In this clinical sample of children with ASD, regression was diagnosed in a small percentage (4%). Those with regression had lower cognitive, language, and adaptive skills compared with those without regression. Rates of clinician-diagnosed regression referred for medical workup are significantly lower than prior estimates based on parent report.
35357874|a|The Children's Emotion Management Scales (CEMS) are widely used measures of children's emotion regulation strategies in response to three specific emotions: sadness, anger, and worry. Original factor analyses suggested a three-factor subscale structure for each emotion: inhibition, dysregulation, and coping (Zeman et al., 2001, 2002, 2010). However, this factor structure had not been reexamined since it was originally developed, including within a racially diverse psychiatric sample. The present study attempted to address this gap for the Anger Management Scale and Sadness Management Scale separately, as well as testing the overarching structure of these two in combination. Participants included 302 children (ages 8-12; 70.4% boys; 55.72% African American; 39.3% White) from inpatient and outpatient centers and their primary caregivers. The three-factor structure replicated well with the Anger Management Scale and Sadness Management Scale separately in our sample. A bifactor model that included both higher order emotion factors (i.e., Anger and Sadness) and higher order strategy factors (i.e., Coping, Dysregulation, and Inhibition) best represented the overarching structure of the CEMS. Results from latent correlations and structural regressions showed that some of these factors were related to child-reported depressive symptoms and parent-reported disruptive behaviors, supporting the validity of the bifactor model conceptualization of scores on the CEMS. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2022 APA, all rights reserved).
35357846|a|Following the popularity of dual process models in social and cognitive psychology, there is major interest in the possibility that autism is associated with impaired "fast" intuitive thinking but enhanced "slow" or "rational" deliberative thinking. If correct, this has great potential to help understand various strengths and difficulties characteristic of autism. Previous empirical investigations of this phenomenon, however, are marred by concerns about the measurement of intuitive and deliberative processing, as well as broader problems in clinical psychological science (e.g., small underpowered studies, lack of replication). Making a step change, we conducted four large-scale studies to examine dual processing in autism, including a preregistered comparison of 200 autistic and nonautistic adults. Participants completed contemporary cognitive and self-report measures of intuitive and deliberative processing, as well as a psychometrically robust measure of general cognitive ability. Except for lower self-reported intuitive thinking, we found no unique contributions of autism to intuitive or deliberative thinking across all four studies, as evidenced by frequentist and Bayesian analyses. Overall, these studies indicate that intuitive and deliberative thinking is neither enhanced nor particularly impaired in relation to autism. We deliberate on the implications of these findings for theories of autism and future investigation of strengths and difficulties in autistic people. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2022 APA, all rights reserved).
35357777|a|Decreased attention to social information is considered an early emerging symptom of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), although the underlying causes remain controversial. Here we explored the impact of nonsocial object salience on reduced attention to social stimuli in male ASD compared with typically developing (TD) children. Correlations with blood concentrations of neuropeptides linked with social cognition were also investigated. Eye-tracking was performed in 102 preschool-aged boys (50 ASD, 52 TD) using a paradigm with social (faces) versus nonsocial (objects) stimuli presented in pairs in two conditions where nonsocial stimulus salience was varied. Basal oxytocin (OXT) and vasopressin concentrations were measured in blood. Compared with TD boys those with ASD viewed social stimuli less only when they were paired with low-salience nonsocial objects. Additionally, boys with ASD spent less time than TD ones viewing facial features, particularly the eyes. In TD boys, OXT concentrations and cognitive development scores were positively associated with time spent viewing the eye region, whereas for boys with ASD associations with time spent viewing faces were negative. Reduced gaze toward social stimuli in ASD relative to TD individuals may therefore be influenced by how salient the paired nonsocial objects are for the latter. On the other hand, reduced interest in the eyes of faces in boys with ASD is not influenced by how salient competing nonsocial stimuli are. Basal OXT concentrations and cognitive development scores are predictive of time spent viewing social stimuli in TD boys (eyes) and those with ASD (faces) but in the opposite direction. LAY SUMMARY: Children with autism exhibit reduced attention to social paired with nonsocial stimuli compared to typically developing children. Using eye-tracking we show this difference is due to typically developing rather than autistic boys being more influenced by how interesting competing nonsocial objects are. On the other hand, reduced time looking at the eyes in autistic relative to typically developing boys is unaffected by nonsocial object salience. Time spent viewing social stimuli is associated with cognitive development and blood levels of oxytocin.
35357603|a|Preschool children with neurotypical development (ND) trained on sentential complements ("X thinks/says that") improve their Theory of Mind (ToM) performance. Can complementation training also enhance ToM in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD)? Thirty-three children with ASD (Mage = 8;11) and 20 younger ND peers (Mage = 4;3) were trained on sentential complements (4-6 weeks, 2-3 times per week, via the DIRE i-Pad App). Pre-training and post-training comparisons show that (1) training boosted both complementation and ToM performance across groups; (2) improvements remained 4-6 weeks after training ended; (3) participants with milder ASD symptoms made most gains. Training on sentential complements thus seems beneficial for addressing ToM difficulties in children with ASD, especially those with milder symptoms.
35357055|a|BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to assess the unmet health care needs of children with intellectual disability (ID) compared with children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and whether access to health insurance coverage is a contributing factor. Children with ID may be masked in the health care system due to increased diagnosis and awareness of ASD. The needs, unmet needs and insurance coverage of children with ID alone, ASD alone, and co-occurring ID and ASD were assessed in this study. METHODS: The 2016 to 2019 United States' Census Bureau National Survey of Children's Health was used to determine differences in unmet needs, care not received and health insurance coverage during the past year for children with ID and/or ASD. Adjusted odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals for care not received were determined controlling for sex, insurance, race, age and parents' highest education level. RESULTS: Children with ID were nearly four times more likely not to receive needed medical care as children with ASD. Results were similar for unmet hearing and mental health care. Children with both ID and ASD were more likely to have unmet health care but less likely to have unmet medical care compared with children with ASD alone. There were no significant differences for unmet dental or vision care. Children with ID were 3.58 (95% confidence interval: 1.6-8.0) times more likely to have inconsistent health insurance compared with children with ASD. CONCLUSIONS: Children with ID alone are more likely to have unmet medical, hearing and mental health care needs than children with ASD alone. Children with co-occurring ID and ASD have a large amount of general unmet health care needs but less unmet medical needs. Children with ID are less likely to have consistent health insurance than children with ASD. This hinders the ability of children with ID to receive quality care. Further research is needed to determine if the diagnosis of ASD in children in the United States is negatively affecting children with ID alone.
35356729|a|Environmental exposure to glyphosate and glyphosate-based herbicides has the potential to negatively influence neurodevelopment and behavior across generations indirectly through the gut-brain-microbiome axis. Potential mechanisms by which glyphosate may elicit these effects are through the disruption of the normally symbiotic relationship of the host and the gut microbiome. Given glyphosate can kill commensal members of the microbiome like Lactobacillus spp., Ruminococaeae and Butyricoccus spp., resulting in reductions in key microbial metabolites that act through the gut-brain-microbiome axis including indoles, L-glutamate and SCFAs. Glyphosate- resistant microbes in the gut have the potential to increase the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and reactive oxygen species which may result in increased HPA activation, resulting in increased production of glucocorticoids which have implications on neurodevelopment. In addition, maternal transfer of the gut microbiome can affect immune and neurodevelopment, across generations. This perspective article weighs the evidence for chronic glyphosate exposure on the gut microbiome and the potential consequences on the gut-brain axis correlated with increased incidence of neuropsychiatric conditions.
35356716|a|Introduction: This study aimed to investigate the prevalence of developmental regression in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and to explore its relationship with disease severity. Methods: We finally included 1,027 ASD children aged 2-5 years from 13 cities in China: 138 with regressive ASD and 889 with non-regressive ASD. The Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS), Autism Behavior Checklist (ABC), Child Autism Rating Scale (CARS), and Children Neuropsychological and Behavioral Scale-Revision 2016 (CNBS-R2016) were used to evaluate the core symptoms and developmental status of children in the two groups. Results: Among the 1,027 ASD children eventually included, 138 (13.44%) cases showed regressive behavior and the average regression occurring age was 24.00 (18.00-27.00) months. Among the regressive children, 105 cases (76.09%) had language regression, 79 cases (57.25%) had social regression, and 4 cases (2.90%) had motor regression. The total scores of ABC and the sub-score of sensory and stereotypic behavior (beta = 5.122, 95% CI: 0.818, 9.426, P < 0.05; beta = 1.104, 95% CI: 0.120, 2.089, P < 0.05; beta = 1.388, 95% CI: 0.038, 2.737, P < 0.05), the SRS total scores and the sub-score of autistic mannerisms (beta = 4.991, 95% CI: 0.494, 9.487, P < 0.05; beta = 1.297, 95% CI: 0.140, 2.453, P < 0.05) of children in the regressive group were all higher than the non-regressive group. The total developmental quotient (DQ) of CNBS-R2016 and the DQ of gross motor, fine motor, adaptive behavior, language (beta = -5.827, 95% CI: -11.529, -0.125, P < 0.05) and personal society in the regressive group were lower than the non-regressive group and the proportion of children with intelligent developmental impairment was higher the non-regressive group. Conclusion: Regressive autism is mainly manifested as language and social regression. Children with regressive ASD have more severe core symptoms, lower neurodevelopmental level DQ, and more serious disease degree than children with non-regressive ASD, which requires further etiological examinations and more clinical attention.
35356620|a|Joint attention is an important element that influences children's early development of communication and sociality, and joint attention is more often than not the earliest incipient of their prosocial behavior. Joint attention skills are one of the core deficits of children with autism, and identifying and remediating the core problems of autism is a popular area of interest, with joint attention being the focus of attention. The aim of this study was to investigate whether the combined orientation model of Discrete Trial Teaching (DTT) and Pivotal Response Training (PRT) could improve the joint attention skills of children with autism. This study used a cross-behavioral multitest design in a single-subject study with two preschool children with autism as subjects, with the independent variable being joint attention teaching and the dependent variable being the three joint attention skills (eye gaze, following directions, and active display). After the instructional intervention, children with autism showed a significant increase in the correctness of "eye alternation," "following directions," and "moving displays."
35356429|a|The etiology of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) is complex, involving different combinations of genetic and environmental factors. My lab's approach has been to investigate DNA methylation as a tractable genome-wide modification at the interface of these complex interactions, reflecting past and future events in the molecular pathogenesis of ASD. Since X-linked genes were enriched in DNA methylation differences discovered from cord blood from newborns later diagnosed with ASD, this has prompted me to review and revisit the recent advancements in the field of X chromosome inactivation (XCI), particularly in humans and other primates. In this Perspective, I compare XCI mechanisms in different mammalian species, including the finding of the noncoding transcript XACT associated with X chromosome erosion in human pluripotent stem cells and recent findings from non-human primate post-implantation embryos. I focus on the experimentally challenging peri- and post-implantation stages of human development when the timing of XCI is prolonged and imprecise in humans. Collectively, this research has raised some important unanswered questions involving biased sex ratios in human births and the male bias in the incidence of ASD.
35356352|a|Impairments in emotional face processing are demonstrated by individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), including autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), which is associated with altered emotion processing networks. Despite accumulating evidence of high rates of diagnostic overlap and shared symptoms between ASD and ADHD, functional connectivity underpinning emotion processing across these two neurodevelopmental disorders, compared to typical developing peers, has rarely been examined. The current study used magnetoencephalography to investigate whole-brain functional connectivity during the presentation of happy and angry faces in 258 children (5-19 years), including ASD, ADHD and typically developing (TD) groups to determine possible differences in emotion processing. Data-driven clustering was also applied to determine whether the patterns of connectivity differed among diagnostic groups. We found reduced functional connectivity in the beta band in ASD compared to TD, and a further reduction in the ADHD group compared to the ASD and the TD groups, across emotions. A group-by-emotion interaction in the gamma frequency band was also observed. Greater connectivity to happy compared to angry faces was found in the ADHD and TD groups, while the opposite pattern was seen in ASD. Data-driven subgrouping identified two distinct subgroups: NDD-dominant and TD-dominant; these subgroups demonstrated emotion- and frequency-specific differences in connectivity. Atypicalities in specific brain networks were strongly correlated with the severity of diagnosis-specific symptoms. Functional connectivity strength in the beta network was negatively correlated with difficulties in attention; in the gamma network, functional connectivity strength to happy faces was positively correlated with adaptive behavioural functioning, but in contrast, negatively correlated to angry faces. Our findings establish atypical frequency- and emotion-specific patterns of functional connectivity between NDD and TD children. Data-driven clustering further highlights a high degree of comorbidity and symptom overlap between the ASD and ADHD children.
35356059|a|Social robots have been shown to be promising tools for delivering therapeutic tasks for children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). However, their efficacy is currently limited by a lack of flexibility of the robot's social behavior to successfully meet therapeutic and interaction goals. Robot-assisted interventions are often based on structured tasks where the robot sequentially guides the child towards the task goal. Motivated by a need for personalization to accommodate a diverse set of children profiles, this paper investigates the effect of different robot action sequences in structured socially interactive tasks targeting attention skills in children with different ASD profiles. Based on an autism diagnostic tool, we devised a robotic prompting scheme on a NAO humanoid robot, aimed at eliciting goal behaviors from the child, and integrated it in a novel interactive storytelling scenario involving screens. We programmed the robot to operate in three different modes: diagnostic-inspired (Assess), personalized therapy-inspired (Therapy), and random (Explore). Our exploratory study with 11 young children with ASD highlights the usefulness and limitations of each mode according to different possible interaction goals, and paves the way towards more complex methods for balancing short-term and long-term goals in personalized robot-assisted therapy.
35355174|a|Eye-tracking studies have shown potential in effectively discriminating between autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and non-ASD groups. The main objective of the present study was to conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis of eye-tracking studies in adults with ASD. A total of 22 studies were included for meta-analysis. Eyes and Non-Social regions proved better for discriminating between ASD and non-ASD adults, while fixation duration seems to be the outcome to choose. Active engaged tasks seem to reduce differences between ASD and non-ASD adults, regardless of the emotional content of the stimuli/task. Proportional fixation duration on eyes and non-social areas in non-active tasks (e.g. free viewing) seems to be the best eye-tracking design for increasing the sensitivity and specificity in ASD adults.
35355055|a|Focal malformations of cortical development including focal cortical dysplasia, hemimegalencephaly and megalencephaly, are a spectrum of neurodevelopmental disorders associated with brain overgrowth, cellular and architectural dysplasia, intractable epilepsy, autism and intellectual disability. Importantly, focal cortical dysplasia is the most common cause of focal intractable paediatric epilepsy. Gain and loss of function variants in the PI3K-AKT-MTOR pathway have been identified in this spectrum, with variable levels of mosaicism and tissue distribution. In this study, we performed deep molecular profiling of common PI3K-AKT-MTOR pathway variants in surgically resected tissues using droplet digital polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR), combined with analysis of key phenotype data. A total of 159 samples, including 124 brain tissue samples, were collected from 58 children with focal malformations of cortical development. We designed an ultra-sensitive and highly targeted molecular diagnostic panel using ddPCR for six mutational hotspots in three PI3K-AKT-MTOR pathway genes, namely PIK3CA (p.E542K, p.E545K, p.H1047R), AKT3 (p.E17K) and MTOR (p.S2215F, p.S2215Y). We quantified the level of mosaicism across all samples and correlated genotypes with key clinical, neuroimaging and histopathological data. Pathogenic variants were identified in 17 individuals, with an overall molecular solve rate of 29.31%. Variant allele fractions ranged from 0.14 to 22.67% across all mutation-positive samples. Our data show that pathogenic MTOR variants are mostly associated with focal cortical dysplasia, whereas pathogenic PIK3CA variants are more frequent in hemimegalencephaly. Further, the presence of one of these hotspot mutations correlated with earlier onset of epilepsy. However, levels of mosaicism did not correlate with the severity of the cortical malformation by neuroimaging or histopathology. Importantly, we could not identify these mutational hotspots in other types of surgically resected epileptic lesions (e.g. polymicrogyria or mesial temporal sclerosis) suggesting that PI3K-AKT-MTOR mutations are specifically causal in the focal cortical dysplasia-hemimegalencephaly spectrum. Finally, our data suggest that ultra-sensitive molecular profiling of the most common PI3K-AKT-MTOR mutations by targeted sequencing droplet digital polymerase chain reaction is an effective molecular approach for these disorders with a good diagnostic yield when paired with neuroimaging and histopathology.
35354925|a|Breaking an impasse in finding mechanism-based therapies of neuropsychiatric disorders requires a strategic shift towards alleviating individual symptoms. Here we present a symptom and circuit-specific approach to rescue deficits of reward learning in Fmr1 knockout mice, a model of Fragile X syndrome (FXS), the most common monogenetic cause of inherited mental disability and autism. We use high-throughput, ecologically-relevant automated tests of cognition and social behavior to assess effectiveness of the circuit-targeted injections of designer nanoparticles, loaded with TIMP metalloproteinase inhibitor 1 protein (TIMP-1). Further, to investigate the impact of our therapeutic strategy on neuronal plasticity we perform long-term potentiation recordings and high-resolution electron microscopy. We show that central amygdala-targeted delivery of TIMP-1 designer nanoparticles reverses impaired cognition in Fmr1 knockouts, while having no impact on deficits of social behavior, hence corroborating symptom-specificity of the proposed approach. Moreover, we elucidate the neural correlates of the highly specific behavioral rescue by showing that the applied therapeutic intervention restores functional synaptic plasticity and ultrastructure of neurons in the central amygdala. Thus, we present a targeted, symptom-specific and mechanism-based strategy to remedy cognitive deficits in Fragile X syndrome.
35353796|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of neurodevelopmental disorders. Despite the extensive efforts of scientists, the etiology of ASD is far from completely elucidated. In an effort to enlighten the genetic architecture of ASDs, a meta-analysis of all available genetic association studies (GAS) was conducted. METHODS: We searched in the Human Genome Epidemiology Navigator (HuGE Navigator) and PubMed for available case-control GAS of ASDs. The threshold for meta-analysis was two studies per genetic variant. The association between genotype distribution and ASDs was examined using the generalized linear odds ratio (ORG). For variants with available allele frequencies, the examined model was the allele contrast. RESULTS: Overall, 57 candidate genes and 128 polymorphisms were investigated in 159 articles. In total 28 genetic polymorphisms have been shown to be associated with ASDs, that are harbored in 19 genes. Statistically significant results were revealed for the variants of the following genes adenosine deaminase (ADA), bone marrow stromal cell antigen-1 (CD157/BST1), Dopamine receptor D1 (DRD1), engrailed homolog 2 (EN2), met proto-oncogene (MET), methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), solute carrier family 6 member 4 (SLC6A4), Synaptosomal-associated protein, 25kDa (SNAP-25) and vitamin D receptor (VDR). In the allele contrast model of cases versus healthy controls, significant associations were observed for Adrenoceptor Alpha 1B (ADRA1B), acetyl serotonin O - methyltransferase (ASMT), complement component 4B (C4B), dopamine receptor D3 (DRD3), met proto-oncogene (MET), neuroligin 4, X-linked (NLGN4), neurexin 1 (NRXN1), oxytocin receptor (OXTR), Serine/Threonine-Protein Kinase PFTAIRE-1 (PFTK1), Reelin (RELN) and Ras-like without CAAX 2 (RIT2). CONCLUSION: These significant findings provide further evidence for genetic factors' implication in ASDs offering new perspectives in means of prevention and prognosis.
35353793|a|OBJECTIVES: We aimed to identify differentially methylated genes and related signaling pathways in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). METHODS: First, the DNA methylation profile in the brain samples (GSE131706 and GSE80017) and peripheral blood samples (GSE109905) was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database (GEO) dataset, followed by identification of differentially methylated genes and functional analysis. Second, the GSE109905 data set was used to further validate the methylation state and test the ability to diagnose disease of identified differentially methylated genes. Third, expression measurement of selected differentially methylated genes was performed in whole blood from an independent sample. Finally, protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of core differentially methylated genes was constructed. RESULTS: Totally, 74 differentially methylated genes were identified in ASD, including 38 hypermethylated genes and 36 hypomethylated genes. 15 differentially methylated genes were further identified after validation in the GSE109905 data set. Among these, major histocompatibility complex (HLA)-DQA1 was involved in the molecular function of myosin heavy chain class II receptor activity; HLA-DRB5 was involved in the signaling pathways of cell adhesion molecules, Epstein-Barr virus infection and antigen processing and presentation. In the PPI analysis, the interaction pairs of HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DRB5, FMN2 and ACTR3, and CALCOCO2 and BAZ2B were identified. Interestingly, FMN2, BAZ2B, HLA-DRB5, CALCOCO2 and DUSP22 had a potential diagnostic value for patients with ASD. The expression result of four differentially methylated genes (HLA-DRB5, NTM, IL16 and COL5A3) in the independent sample was consistent with the integrated analysis. CONCLUSIONS: Identified differentially methylated genes and enriched signaling pathway could be associated with ASD.
35353786|a|OBJECTIVE: We examined characteristics associated with receiving the North Carolina Home and Community-Based Services Waiver for intellectual and developmental disabilities (I/DDs) and its association with emergency department (ED) utilization. METHOD: Through analysis of the North Carolina 2017 to 2018 Medicaid claims and enrollment data, we examined characteristics (age, sex, race and ethnicity, geography, diagnosis (intellectual disability [ID] with or without autism spectrum disorders or autism spectrum disorder without ID) associated with receiving the NC I/DD Waiver and the association of this Wavier with ED utilization. We identified patients with at least 1 International Classification of Diseases-10-CM diagnosis code for an ID or autism spectrum disorder. We excluded patients with missing county information and whose enrollment in the NC I/DD Waiver program began after October 1, 2017. RESULTS: Only 22% of 53,531 individuals with I/DD in North Carolina received the Waiver. Non-Hispanic Blacks and Hispanic individuals were less likely to receive the Waiver than non-Hispanic White individuals. Adults (>21 years old), men, and urban residents were more likely to receive the Waiver. Individuals who received the Waiver were 31% less likely to use the ED. CONCLUSION: Innovative strategies are needed to provide equitable access to the NC I/DD Waiver and provide services to the 14,000 people with I/DD currently waiting to receive the Waiver. Through the Waiver, those with I/DD can access preventative and therapeutic outpatient services and decrease their need for ED care. These findings highlight the need for policy reform to address inequities in access to the Waiver for individuals with I/DD.
35353335|a|
35353173|a|Importance: Previous in vitro and postmortem research suggests that inflammation may lead to structural brain changes via activation of microglia and/or astrocytic dysfunction in a range of neuropsychiatric disorders. Objective: To investigate the relationship between inflammation and changes in brain structures in vivo and to explore a transcriptome-driven functional basis with relevance to mental illness. Design, Setting, and Participants: This study used multistage linked analyses, including mendelian randomization (MR), gene expression correlation, and connectivity analyses. A total of 20 688 participants in the UK Biobank, which includes clinical, genomic, and neuroimaging data, and 6 postmortem brains from neurotypical individuals in the Allen Human Brain Atlas (AHBA), including RNA microarray data. Data were extracted in February 2021 and analyzed between March and October 2021. Exposures: Genetic variants regulating levels and activity of circulating interleukin 1 (IL-1), IL-2, IL-6, C-reactive protein (CRP), and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) were used as exposures in MR analyses. Main Outcomes and Measures: Brain imaging measures, including gray matter volume (GMV) and cortical thickness (CT), were used as outcomes. Associations were considered significant at a multiple testing-corrected threshold of P < 1.1 x 10-4. Differential gene expression in AHBA data was modeled in brain regions mapped to areas significant in MR analyses; genes were tested for biological and disease overrepresentation in annotation databases and for connectivity in protein-protein interaction networks. Results: Of 20 688 participants in the UK Biobank sample, 10 828 (52.3%) were female, and the mean (SD) age was 55.5 (7.5) years. In the UK Biobank sample, genetically predicted levels of IL-6 were associated with GMV in the middle temporal cortex (z score, 5.76; P = 8.39 x 10-9), inferior temporal (z score, 3.38; P = 7.20 x 10-5), fusiform (z score, 4.70; P = 2.60 x 10-7), and frontal (z score, -3.59; P = 3.30 x 10-5) cortex together with CT in the superior frontal region (z score, -5.11; P = 3.22 x 10-7). No significant associations were found for IL-1, IL-2, CRP, or BDNF after correction for multiple comparison. In the AHBA sample, 5 of 6 participants (83%) were male, and the mean (SD) age was 42.5 (13.4) years. Brain-wide coexpression analysis showed a highly interconnected network of genes preferentially expressed in the middle temporal gyrus (MTG), which further formed a highly connected protein-protein interaction network with IL-6 (enrichment test of expected vs observed network given the prevalence and degree of interactions in the STRING database: 43 nodes/30 edges observed vs 8 edges expected; mean node degree, 1.4; genome-wide significance, P = 4.54 x 10-9). MTG differentially expressed genes that were functionally enriched for biological processes in schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorder, and epilepsy. Conclusions and Relevance: In this study, genetically determined IL-6 was associated with brain structure and potentially affects areas implicated in developmental neuropsychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia and autism.
35352418|a|Autism assistance dogs (AADs) increase safety for children with autism and their families. Autism assistance dogs can also decrease familial stress and the isolation which families may experience due to fear for their child's safety and judgement from others within the community. Currently there is a paucity of literature on parents' experiences of AADs. Therefore, this study aimed to develop a rich understanding of parents' experiences of owning an AAD. A mixed methods design was utilised, with a qualitative descriptive design and the use of occupational mapping. Eight families were recruited through an Australian AAD programme and participated in semi-structured in-depth interviews throughout 2017. The interviews were analysed thematically. Mobility in the community before and after introduction of the dog was measured using occupational mapping. Families plotted on Google Map printouts the places they frequented before and after placement of their dog. Five major themes emerged from the analysis of the interviews: freedom through restraint; expanding our world; a calming/sensory tool (AAD); "at the end of the day they're dogs"; and, friendship and personal growth. The occupational maps demonstrated a median increase of 8.5 more places and 20.50 km further travelled from home after having the dog for over a year. Families with an AAD experienced an expanded world for the child and their family. Families experienced freedom in the places they could go, decreased isolation due to the safety which the dog provides. Occupational mapping supported the qualitative data, showing increased mobility and decreased isolation of the family. The paradox of freedom through restraint is a new and key finding which requires further exploration. The results provide support for funding and increased awareness of AAD programmes. Future longitudinal comparative studies are needed to explore the long-term impact of AADs on the child and family.
35352234|a|This study aimed to analyze the relationship between sex and corpus callosum (CC) volume in children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) aged 2-4 years. This prospective study included 50 children with ASD and 50 typically developing (TD) children aged 2-4 years. Midsagittal slices of the CCs of the participants were divided into five subregions using FreeSurfer software. The PMCC, AMCC and TCC volumes were significantly higher in ASD participants than in TD participants, and results were significant in females with ASD rather than in males with ASD (all P < 0.05). In toddlers with ASD, the CC volumes were increased and more pronounced in females than in males. This could be due to overgrowth of axons or/and axonal pruning disorders.
35352007|a|BACKGROUND: Accurate knowledge of the relationship between craniofacial anomalies (CFA), intellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is essential to improve services and outcomes. The aim is to describe the association between CFA, ID and ASD using linked population data. METHODS: All births (1983-2005; n = 566,225) including CFA births (comprising orofacial clefts, craniosynostosis, craniofacial microsomia and mandibulofacial dysostosis) surviving to 5 years were identified from the birth, death, birth defects and midwives population data sets. Linked data from these data sets were followed for a minimum of 5 years from birth until 2010 in the intellectual disability database to identify ID and ASD. These associations were examined using a modified Poisson regression. RESULTS: Prevalence of ID and ASD was higher among CFA (especially with additional anomalies) than those without [prevalence ratio 5.27, 95% CI 4.44, 6.25]. It was higher among CFA than those with other gastrointestinal and urogenital anomalies but lower than nervous system and chromosomal anomalies. Children with CFA and severe ID had a higher proportion of nervous system anomalies. CONCLUSIONS: Findings indicate increased ID and ASD among CFA but lower than nervous system and chromosomal anomalies. This population evidence can improve early identification of ID/ASD among CFA and support service planning. IMPACT: Our study found about one in ten children born with craniofacial anomalies (CFA) are later identified with intellectual disability (ID). Prevalence of ID among CFA was higher than those with other gastrointestinal, urogenital, and musculoskeletal birth defects but lower than those with the nervous system and chromosomal abnormalities. Most children with craniofacial anomalies have a mild-to-moderate intellectual disability with an unknown aetiology. On average, intellectual disability is identified 2 years later for children born with non-syndromic craniofacial anomalies than those with syndromic conditions. Our findings can improve the early identification of ID/ASD among CFA and support service planning.
35351881|a|Epidemiological studies have proven that exposure to Arsenic (AS) leads to the development of many neurological disorders. However, few studies have investigated its molecular mechanisms in the brain. Our previous work has revealed nitric oxide (NO)-mediated apoptosis and SNO reprogramming in the cortex following arsenic treatment, yet the role of NO and S-nitrosylation (SNO) in AS-mediated neurotoxicity has not been investigated. Therefore, we have conducted a multidisciplinary in-vivo study in mice with two different doses of Sodium Arsenite (SA) (0.1 ppm and 1 ppm) in drinking water. We used the novel SNOTRAP-based mass spectrometry method followed by the bioinformatics analysis, Western blot validation, and five different behavioral tests. Bioinformatics analysis of SA-treated mice showed significant SNO-enrichment of processes involved in mitochondrial respiratory function, endogenous antioxidant systems, transcriptional regulation, cytoskeleton maintenance, and regulation of apoptosis. Western blotting showed increased levels of cleaved PARP-1 and cleaved caspase-3 in SA-treated mice consistent with SA-induced apoptosis. Behavioral studies showed significant cognitive dysfunctions similar to those of Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). A comparative analysis of the SNO-proteome of SA-treated mice with two transgenic mouse strains, models of ASD and AD, showed molecular convergence of SA environmental neurotoxicity and the genetic mutations causing ASD and AD. This is the first study to show the effects of AS on SNO-signaling in the striatum and hippocampus and its effects on behavioral characteristics. Finally, further investigation of the NO-dependent mechanisms of AS-mediated neurotoxicity may reveal new drug targets for its prevention.
35351188|a|
35350986|a|BACKGROUND: SATB2-associated syndrome (SAS) is a multisystem neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by intellectual disability, speech delay, and craniofacial anomalies. Although the clinical presentation of SAS is well-delineated, behaviours associated with SAS are less well-defined. Given the varied social profile reported in SAS of a 'jovial' predisposition and autistic behaviours, there may be phenotypic overlap with both Angelman syndrome (AS) and non-syndromal autism. This study aimed to describe behaviours in SAS in relation to chronological age and level of ability and contrast aspects of the behavioural phenotype with AS and non-syndromal autism. METHODS: Informant report questionnaire measures of behaviour, emotion, and autism characteristics were completed for 81 individuals with SAS (aged 1-36 years; 43 male). Within-group associations were analysed, and categorical data were compared between pre-school (1-5 years), school-age (6-15 years), and adolescent and adult SAS sub-groups (16 years and over). Cross-syndrome subscale and item-level analyses were conducted for 63 individuals with SAS (aged 1-27 years; 31 male), who were matched according to age and level of ability to 63 individuals with AS (aged 2-25 years; 32 male) and 63 individuals with non-syndromal autism (aged 3-26 years; 53 male). RESULTS: In SAS, higher rates of overactivity were moderately associated with lower self-help ability, and higher general anxiety scores were reported for males compared with females. Cross-syndrome subscale analyses uncovered several significant differences (p < .01), with comparatively low rates of stereotyped behaviour, overactivity, insistence on sameness and positive affect, and comparatively greater interest and pleasure and compulsive behaviour in individuals with SAS. Item-level analyses revealed a distinct profile of repetitive and autistic behaviours. LIMITATIONS: Developmental analysis was based on a cross-sectional rather than a longitudinal research design, the contribution of pain and sleep to behaviour was not explored, and molecular genetic testing to determine genotype-phenotype behavioural relationships was not possible. CONCLUSIONS: This study highlights the importance of behavioural comparisons to well-delineated groups and the utility of fine-grained item-level analyses to elucidate aspects of behaviour that might be syndrome related or shared across neurodevelopmental disorders. Future research is needed to further describe the distinctive repetitive and autistic behavioural phenotype in SAS.
35350424|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a highly heterogeneous neuropsychiatric disorder with a strong genetic component. The genetic architecture is complex, consisting of a combination of common low-risk and more penetrant rare variants. Voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs or Cav) genes have been implicated as high-confidence susceptibility genes for ASD, in accordance with the relevant role of calcium signaling in neuronal function. In order to further investigate the involvement of VGCCs rare variants in ASD susceptibility, we performed whole genome sequencing analysis in a cohort of 105 families, composed of 124 ASD individuals, 210 parents and 58 unaffected siblings. We identified 53 rare inherited damaging variants in Cav genes, including genes coding for the principal subunit and genes coding for the auxiliary subunits, in 40 ASD families. Interestingly, biallelic rare damaging missense variants were detected in the CACNA1H gene, coding for the T-type Cav3.2 channel, in ASD probands from two different families. Thus, to clarify the role of these CACNA1H variants on calcium channel activity we performed electrophysiological analysis using whole-cell patch clamp technology. Three out of four tested variants were shown to mildly affect Cav3.2 channel current density and activation properties, possibly leading to a dysregulation of intracellular Ca2+ ions homeostasis, thus altering calcium-dependent neuronal processes and contributing to ASD etiology in these families. Our results provide further support for the role of CACNA1H in neurodevelopmental disorders and suggest that rare CACNA1H variants may be involved in ASD development, providing a high-risk genetic background.
35350086|a|During childhood, the ability to detect audiovisual synchrony gradually sharpens for simple stimuli such as flashbeeps and single syllables. However, little is known about how children perceive synchrony for natural and continuous speech. This study investigated young children's gaze patterns while they were watching movies of two identical speakers telling stories side by side. Only one speaker's lip movements matched the voices and the other one either led or lagged behind the soundtrack by 600 ms. Children aged 3-6 years (n = 94, 52.13% males) showed an overall preference for the synchronous speaker, with no age-related changes in synchrony-detection sensitivity as indicated by similar gaze patterns across ages. However, viewing time to the synchronous speech was significantly longer in the auditory-leading (AL) condition compared with that in the visual-leading (VL) condition, suggesting asymmetric sensitivities for AL versus VL asynchrony have already been established in early childhood. When further examining gaze patterns on dynamic faces, we found that more attention focused on the mouth region was an adaptive strategy to read visual speech signals and thus associated with increased viewing time of the synchronous videos. Attention to detail, one dimension of autistic traits featured by local processing, has been found to be correlated with worse performances in speech synchrony processing. These findings extended previous research by showing the development of speech synchrony perception in young children, and may have implications for clinical populations (e.g., autism) with impaired multisensory integration.
35350033|a|
35349448|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by poor social communication abilities and repetitive behaviors or restrictive interests, which has brought a heavy burden to families and society. In many attempts to understand ASD neurobiology, resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) has been an effective tool. However, current ASD diagnosis methods based on rs-fMRI have two major defects. First, the instability of rs-fMRI leads to functional connectivity (FC) uncertainty, affecting the performance of ASD diagnosis. Second, many FCs are involved in brain activity, making it difficult to determine effective features in ASD classification. In this study, we propose an interpretable ASD classifier DeepTSK, which combines a multi-output Takagi-Sugeno-Kang (MO-TSK) fuzzy inference system (FIS) for composite feature learning and a deep belief network (DBN) for ASD classification in a unified network. To avoid the suboptimal solution of DeepTSK, we employ a joint optimization procedure to simultaneously learn the parameters of MO-TSK and DBN. The proposed DeepTSK was evaluated on datasets collected from three sites of the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE) database. The experimental results showed the effectiveness of the proposed method, and the discriminant FCs are presented by analyzing the consequent parameters of Deep MO-TSK.
35348591|a|
35348519|a|Resources to help promote patients' and families' well-being.
35348304|a|A growing body of research suggests that consistency in cortical activity may be a promising neurophysiological marker of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). In the current study we examined inter-trial coherence, a measure of phase consistency across trials, in the theta range (t-ITC: 3-6 Hz), as theta has been implicated in the processing of social and emotional stimuli in infants and adults. The sample included infants who had an older sibling with a confirmed ASD diagnosis and typically developing (TD) infants with no family history of ASD. The data were collected as part of the British Autism Study of Infant Siblings (BASIS) study. Infants between 6 and 10 months of age (Mage  = 7.34, SDage  = 1.21) performed a visual face processing task that included faces and scrambled, "face noise", stimuli. Follow-up assessments in higher likelihood infants were completed at 24 and again at 36 months to determine diagnostic outcomes. Analysis focused on posterior t-ITC during early (0-200 ms) and late (200-500 ms) visual processing stages commonly investigated in infant studies. t-ITC over posterior scalp regions during late stage face processing was significantly higher in TD and higher likelihood infants without ASD (HRA-), indicating reduced consistency in theta-band responses in higher likelihood infants who eventually receive a diagnosis of ASD (HRA+). These findings indicate that the temporal dynamics of theta during face processing relate to ASD outcomes. Reduced consistency of oscillatory dynamics at basic levels of infant sensory processing could have downstream effects on learning and social communication. LAY SUMMARY: We examined the consistency in brain responses to faces in infants at lower or higher familial likelihood for autism. Our results show that the consistency of EEG responses was lower during face processing in higher likelihood infants who eventually received a diagnosis of autism. These findings highlight that reduced consistency in brain activity during face processing in the first year of life is related to emerging autism.
35348301|a|Intracortical myelin is thought to play a significant role in the development of neural circuits and functional networks, with consistent evidence of atypical network connectivity in children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). However, little is known about the development of intracortical myelin in the first years of life in ASD, during the critical neurodevelopmental period when autism symptoms first emerge. Using T1-weighted (T1w) and T2-weighted (T2w) structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in 21 young children with ASD and 16 typically developing (TD) children, ages 1.5 to 5.5 years, we demonstrate the feasibility of estimating intracortical myelin in vivo using the T1w/T2w ratio as a proxy. The resultant T1w/T2w maps were largely comparable with those reported in prior T1w/T2w studies in typically developing children and adults, and revealed no group differences between TD children and those with ASD. However, differential associations between T1w/T2w and age were identified in several early myelinated regions (e.g., visual, posterior cingulate, precuneus cortices) in the ASD and TD groups, with age-related increase in estimated myelin content across the toddler and preschool years detected in TD children, but not in children with ASD. The atypical age-related effects in intracortical myelin, suggesting a disrupted myelination in the first years of life in ASD, may be related to the aberrant brain network connectivity reported in young children with ASD in some of the same cortical regions and circuits. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
35348128|a|OBJECTIVES: Angelman syndrome is a neurogenetic disorder resulting from the loss of expression of the ubiquitin-protein ligase E3A gene on chromosome 15. Problematic behaviors including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) symptoms of hyperactivity, impulsivity and inattention are highly prevalent in Angelman syndrome. The efficacy, safety and tolerability of stimulant medications in children with Angelman syndrome for the treatment of ADHD symptoms have not been previously reported. METHODS: We describe three boys with Angelman syndrome who were treated with open-label stimulant medications for ADHD symptoms. RESULTS: Stimulant medications were highly intolerable, and treatment had to be discontinued after limited dosing in all three cases due to marked increases in hyperactivity and impulsivity along with worsened distractibility. CONCLUSION: The findings of this study suggest that stimulant medications may be ineffective and poorly tolerated in children with Angelman syndrome.
35348051|a|BACKGROUND: Anhedonia is apparent in different mental disorders and is suggested to be related to dysfunctions in the reward system and/or affect regulation. It may hence be a common underlying feature associated with symptom severity of mental disorders. METHODS: We constructed a cross-sectional graphical Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) network and a relative importance network to estimate the relationships between anhedonia severity and the severity of symptom clusters of major depressive disorder (MDD), anxiety sensitivity (AS), attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in a sample of Dutch adult psychiatric patients (N = 557). RESULTS: Both these networks revealed anhedonia severity and depression symptom severity as central to the network. Results suggest that anhedonia severity may be predictive of the severity of symptom clusters of MDD, AS, ADHD, and ASD. MDD symptom severity may be predictive of AS and ADHD symptom severity. CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that anhedonia may serve as a common underlying transdiagnostic psychopathology feature, predictive of the severity of symptom clusters of depression, AS, ADHD, and ASD. Thus, anhedonia may be associated with the high comorbidity between these symptom clusters and disorders. If our results will be replicated in future studies, it is recommended for clinicians to be more vigilant about screening for anhedonia and/or depression severity in individuals diagnosed with an anxiety disorder, ADHD and/or ASD.
35347878|a|An increasing number of studies have shown that autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) share symptoms and aetiologies. However, transdiagnostic comparisons between ASD and ADHD is complicated due to the sex differences within each condition. To clarify the similarities and differences in the cognitive functioning between ASD and ADHD, while considering potential sex differences, this study compared cognitive profiles assessed by the WAIS-III between the four groups created by orthogonally combining diagnosis and sex based on the data from 277 ASD males, 86 ASD females, 99 ADHD males and 64 ADHD females. The analysis revealed three major findings. First, performance IQ and perceptual organization index were higher in ADHD males than in ASD males and ADHD females. Second, Gaussian mixture model fitting revealed two clusters underlying the distribution of subindex scores. The percentage of being classified into the cluster that scored lower in all the subindices was higher in females than in males irrespective of diagnosis. Third, feature importance for classification of ASD and ADHD yielded by random forest classifier, a supervised machine learning algorithm, revealed that autism quotient was most informative feature in classifying ASD and ADHD in males, while the discrepancy between verbal and performance intelligence quotient was in females, indicating that the set of behavioral features contributing to classification differs between males and females. Thus, these findings indicate that sex as well as diagnosis is critical in determining the cognitive profiles of people with ASD and ADHD. LAY SUMMARY: The present study compared profiles of cognitive functions measured by Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale between males and females with ASD and ADHD. The analyses revealed clear sex differences in cognitive functions in both ASD and ADHD and that the set of cognitive functions useful in classifying ASD and ADHD differed between males and females. Thus, biological sex seems to be a critical factor in determining the cognitive profiles of people with ASD and ADHD.
35347114|a|Major depression (MD) is a complex, heterogeneous neuropsychiatric disorder. An early age at onset of major depression (AAO-MD) has been associated with more severe illness, psychosis, and suicidality. However, not much is known about what contributes to individual variation in this important clinical characteristic. This study sought to investigate the genetic components underlying AAO-MD. To investigate the genetics of AAO-MD, we conducted a genome-wide association meta-analysis of AAO-MD based on self-reported age of symptoms onset and self-reported age at first diagnosis from the UK Biobank cohort (total N = 94,154). We examined the genetic relationship between AAO-MD and five other psychiatric disorders. Polygenic risk scores were derived to examine their association with five psychiatric outcomes and AAO-MD in independent sub-samples. We found a small but significant SNP-heritability (~6%) for the AAO-MD phenotype. No SNP or gene reached SNP or gene-level significance. We found evidence that AAO-MD has genetic overlap with MD risk ([Formula: see text] = -0.49). Similarly, we found shared genetic risks between AAO-MD and autism-spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and anorexia nervosa ([Formula: see text] range: -0.3 to -0.5). Polygenic risk scores for AAO-MD were associated with MD, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder, and AAO-MD was in turn associated with polygenic risk scores derived from these disorders. Overall, our results indicate that AAO-MD is heritable, and there is an inverse genetic relationship between AAO-MD and both major depression and other psychiatric disorders, meaning that SNPs associated with earlier age at onset tend to increase the risk for psychiatric disorders. These findings suggest that the genetics of AAO-MD contribute to the shared genetic architecture observed between psychiatric disorders.
35346813|a|ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Bacopa monnieri (BM) is commonly employed in the Indian traditional system of medicines, i.e. Ayurveda. As a memory booster, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antipyretic, analgesic, sedative and anti-epileptic for decades. AIM OF THE STUDY: To evaluate the neuroprotective effect of Bacopa monnieri (BM) in experimental model of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in wistar rats and explore its mechanism of action. MATERIALS AND METHODS: BacoMind, was evaluated for its neuroprotective effect in valproic acid (VPA) model of ASD. For in-vivo study, the pregnant female wistar rats were divided in two groups; normal control (NC) and VPA group who received single dose of normal saline (0.9%; or 600 mg/kg dose of VPA) respectively on gestation day (G.D) 12.5. After the birth, all pups were segregated according to the sex. All the male pups from the dams were divided into six groups: Group 1 (NC, treated with only 0.9% normal saline, group 2 (VPA, treated 600 mg/kg on G.D12.5 and normal saline from PND 23 to 43), group 3 (Risperidone 2.5 mg/kg, PND 23 to 43) and groups 4, 5 and 6 (BM 20, 40, 80 mg/kg, PND 23 to 43). All experimental groups were subjected to battery of behaviour parameters (three Chamber Sociability test, Morris Water Maze, elevated Plus Maze, open field and rota rod test), biochemical parameters such as oxidative stress (GSH, SOD, Catalase, MDA), inflammatory cytokines (Il-1beta, IL-6, IL-10, TNF-alpha), histopathological examination (cresyl violet staining) of hippocampus (HC) and prefrontal cortex (PFC) regions. Further, the mRNA as well as protein expression of AMPA receptor was evaluated using RT-PCR and western blot respectively to study the mechanism of the neuroprotective effect of BM. The in-silico analysis followed evaluating the binding profile of different constituents of BacoMind with AMPA receptor. RESULTS: The results of the in-vivo study indicated BM at 80mg/kg ameliorated abnormal behavioral paradigms such as social deficits, repetitive behavior, learning and memory impairments, and motor coordination. Furthermore, BM was found to have a significant anti-oxidant (increasing GSH, SOD, and catalase and decreasing MDA levels) and anti-inflammatory properties (decreasing IL-1beta, 6, TNF- alpha). The histopathological score was also found to be significantly improved by BM in a dose dependent manner in both HC and PFC. In addition to this, the up-regulated mRNA as well as protein expression of AMPA receptor was significantly reduced by 80 mg/kg dose of BM in both HC and PFC. Further, the in-silico of different constituents of BacoMind with AMPA receptor showed that luteolin and apigenin showed good binding to both the competitive antagonist binding site, non-competitive antagonist binding site and allosteric modulator site while Bacosaponin C showed good binding to the non-competitive antagonist binding site. CONCLUSION: The present study concluded that BM can be a potential candidate for ameliorating the ASD symptoms and acts via modulating the up-regulated AMPA receptor expression.
35346540|a|BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: This study examined the prevalence and related factors of multiple (two or three) types of harassment victimization, including school bullying, cyberbullying, and teacher harassment, and their cumulative effects on depression, anxiety, self-esteem, and suicidality in adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) but without intellectual disability. METHODS: A total of 219 adolescents with ASD but without intellectual disability and their parents participated in this study. Their experiences of school bullying, cyberbullying, and teacher harassment were evaluated. The related factors of multiple types of harassment victimization, including demographic characteristics, socio-communicative skills, comorbid attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and oppositional defiant disorder (ODD) symptoms, were examined. Moreover, the effects of multiple types of harassment victimization on depression, anxiety, self-esteem, and suicidality were examined. RESULTS: In total, 20.54% of participants were victims of multiple types of harassment. Hyperactivity or impulsivity and ODD symptoms were positively associated with multiple types of harassment victimization. Adolescents with ASD who experienced multiple types of harassment victimization had higher severities of depression and anxiety and were more likely to have suicidality than nonvictims and those who experienced only one type of harassment victimization. CONCLUSION: Experiencing more than one type of harassment victimization was significantly associated with the development of mental health problems in adolescents with ASD. ODD and hyperactivity/impulsivity symptoms predicted the risk of experiencing multiple types of harassment.
35346350|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by deficits in social functioning and is comorbid with internalizing disorders and symptoms. While personality is associated with these symptoms and social functioning in non-ASD samples, its role mediating the relationship between ASD traits and internalizing symptoms is not clear. METHODS: We studied the mediating effect of personality on the correlations between ASD traits and internalizing symptoms (i.e., depression, anxiety, stress) in two samples. Additionally, we explored the moderating effect of gender. Analyses were applied to a small (Study 1; N = 101) undergraduate sample. A broader sample recruited via an online crowdsourcing platform (Study 2; N = 371) was used to validate the results. RESULTS: Study 1's mediation analyses revealed that neuroticism was the only significant mediator. Study 2 replicated these results by finding extraversion to be an additional mediator for anxiety and extraversion, openness, and agreeableness as additional mediators for stress. Moderation analyses revealed that gender was never a significant moderator. CONCLUSIONS: These results support the effects of personality on the relationship between autism traits and internalizing symptoms. Future research should explore these effects in clinical samples to better understand the role of personality in symptomatology and the need to address it as part of intervention.
35346312|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental condition characterized by specific social symptoms, restricted interests, stereotyped repetitive behaviors, and delayed language development. The 3q29 microdeletion (3q29del), a recurrent copy number variant, confers a high risk for ASD and schizophrenia, and serves as an important pathological model for investigating the molecular pathogenesis of a large number of neurodevelopmental and psychiatric conditions. Recently, mouse models carrying a deletion of the chromosomal region corresponding to the human 3q29 region (Df/+ mice) were generated and demonstrated neurodevelopmental and psychiatric conditions associated behavioral abnormalities, pointing to the relevance of Df/+ mice as a model for these conditions with high construct and face validity. Currently, the molecular pathogenesis of these behavioral phenotypes in Df/+ mice remains unclear. The oxytocin (OXT) system plays a central role in social behavior across species and has a potential role in ASD. In this study, to elucidate the molecular mechanisms behind impaired social behavior in Df/+ mice, we investigated the possible involvement of OXT signaling in impaired social behavior in Df/+ mice. We demonstrated that OXT administration restored the impaired social behavior in Df/+ mice. We also demonstrated that the number of OXT-positive cells in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) was significantly lower in Df/+ mice than in wild-type (WT) littermates. Consistent with this, the level of OXT peptide in the cerebral cortex of Df/+ mice was lower than in WT littermates. Our study may provide important insights into the molecular pathophysiological basis of neurodevelopmental and psychiatric conditions, including ASD.
35346125|a|BACKGROUND: School attendance problems (SAPs) are common among children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Currently, there is a lack of guidelines for treatment or interventions aimed at this group. METHOD: Twelve clinical practitioners were interviewed via in-depth interviews using a semi-structured question guide. Interviews were audiotaped, transcribed verbatim, and initially independently coded by two coders. The interviews were analyzed according to thematic analysis. RESULTS: The majority of the clinicians reported that it was common that children and adolescents with ASD at CAP had prolonged SAPs. A total of four themes and 22 sub-themes were identified in the analysis: the treatment situation; treatment goals at CAP; treatment interventions; and desired development. Insufficient adaptations in response to core impairment of ASD and lack of support in their daily life could be factors to the development of SAPs. Prolonged social isolation in combination with severe psychiatric comorbidities was reported as a treatment barrier. Also, insufficient collaboration between mental health care services, school and social services obstructed the return to school for this group of students. Favorable factors for positive treatment outcome were: early detection, accurate assessment and coordination between mental health care and schools and environmental adaptation at school as well as at home, parent support and sometimes change of school. Concerning useful therapeutic techniques, exposure from cognitive-behavioral treatment was reported. CONCLUSION: Children and adolescents with ASD with limited societal support tend to develop SAPs. Important factors that impact the outcome of treatment were the length of the absence from school and the severity of psychiatric comorbidities. Tailored and adapted interventions at school, parent support and mental health care are needed. Research about assessment and treatment for children and adolescents with ASD and SAPs is needed.
35345999|a|Neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders are the main risks for the health care system, exhibiting a huge socioeconomic load. The available range of pharmacotherapeutics mostly provides palliative consequences and fails to treat such conditions. The molecular etiology ofvarious neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders is mostly associated with a change in genetic background, which can be inherited/triggered by other environmental factors. To address such conditions, gene therapy is considered a potential approach claiming a permanent cure of the disease primarily by deletion, silencing, or edition of faulty genes and by insertion of healthier genes. In gene therapy, vectors (viral/non-vial) play an important role in delivering the desired gene to a specific region of the brain. Targeted gene therapy hasunraveled opportunitiesfor the treatment of many neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders. For improved gene delivery, the current techniques are mainly focusing on designing a precise viral vector, plasmid transfection, nanotechnology, microRNA, and in vivo clustered regulatory interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-based therapy. These latest techniques have great benefits in treating predominant neurological and neurodevelopmental disorders, including Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, and autism spectrum disorder, as well as rarer diseases. Nevertheless, all these delivery methods have their limitations, including immunogenic reactions, off-target effects, and a deficiency of effective biomarkers to appreciate the effectiveness of therapy. In this review, we present a summary of the current methods in targeted gene delivery, followed by the limitations and future direction of gene therapy for the cure of neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders.
35345073|a|Background & objectives: Prevalence of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has been reportedly on the rise in western literature. However, accurate data from India are not available. The present study was planned to assess the community-based prevalence of ASD in Chandigarh, India. Methods: This study was a two-stage survey of representative child population of Chandigarh using stratified random sampling technique, covering 8820 children between the ages 1.5 and 10 yr. Proportionate population from urban (82.3%), rural (4.3%) and slum area (13.4%) were included in the study and screened using Chandigarh autism screening instrument (CASI). Thirty two children scored above cut-off, of whom two had shifted to other places before they could be assessed and 30 were assessed in detail. Detailed assessment was done using Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised and Childhood Autism Rating Scale-2; diagnosis was made according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-5. Nineteen were diagnosed with ASD. Results: Of the 8451 children screened between the age group of one and a half to 10 yr, 19 (10 boys and 9 girls) were diagnosed as ASD, thus the prevalence of ASD was found to be 2.25 per 1000 (0.69-5.19, 95% confidence interval) children in Chandigarh. No child below the cut-off on the screening instrument was diagnosed as ASD. Interpretation & conclusions: The results suggest that the prevalence of ASD in Chandigarh was in tandem with other reports from across India and was lower than western countries.
35344748|a|IQSEC2 is an X-linked gene localized to the post synaptic density encoding a GTP exchange factor that regulates NMDA mediated changes in synaptic function. Mutations in the IQSEC2 gene are associated with drug resistant epilepsy, intellectual disability and autism. Precision medicine based therapeutics to treat IQSEC2 associated epilepsy requires the development and characterization of mutation specific animal models. To date no EEG recordings have been presented for any mouse model of any IQSEC2 mutation showing seizures. In this study we characterize the seizures and EEG brain wave abnormalities present in mice with a A350V IQSEC2 missense mutation that is associated with drug resistant epilepsy in man. We show that seizures are associated with a greater than 40% mortality rate in male mice and occur exclusively from post-natal day 16-20. EEG recordings of mouse pups during this window demonstrate seizures and the presence of spikes with a marked increase in delta waves. EEG recordings in adult male mice have persistent excessive slow frequency activity and spikes, but seizures were not recorded. RNAseq analysis of the hippocampi of mice prior to the development of seizures demonstrated marked abnormalities in canonical pathways involved in synaptogenesis and dendritic maturation with the most prominently dysregulated gene being that for TRH suggesting a potential target for therapy given the previous demonstration of TRH to decrease seizures in several forms of drug resistant epilepsy.
35343998|a|Importance: Although antipsychotic drugs cross the placenta and animal data suggest potential neurotoxic effects, information regarding human neurodevelopmental teratogenicity is limited. Objective: To evaluate whether children prenatally exposed to antipsychotic medication are at an increased risk of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD). Design, Settings, and Participants: This birth cohort study used data from the Medicaid Analytic eXtract (MAX, 2000-2014) and the IBM Health MarketScan Research Database (MarketScan, 2003-2015) for a nationwide sample of publicly (MAX) and privately (MarketScan) insured mother-child dyads with up to 14 years of follow-up. The MAX cohort consisted of 2 034 883 children who were not prenatally exposed and 9551 who were prenatally exposed to antipsychotic medications; the MarketScan consisted of 1 306 408 and 1221 children, respectively. Hazard ratios were estimated through Cox proportional hazards regression, using propensity score overlap weights for confounding control. Estimates from both cohorts were combined through meta-analysis. Exposures: At least 1 dispensing of a medication during the second half of pregnancy (period of synaptogenesis), assessed for any antipsychotic drug, at the class level (atypical and typical), and for the most commonly used drugs (aripiprazole, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, and haloperidol). Main Outcomes and Measures: Autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, learning disability, speech or language disorder, developmental coordination disorder, intellectual disability, and behavioral disorder, identified using validated algorithms, and the composite outcome of any NDD. Data were analyzed from April 2020 to January 2022. Results: The MAX cohort consisted of 2 034 883 unexposed pregnancies and 9551 pregnancies with 1 or more antipsychotic drug dispensings among women with a mean (SD) age of 26.8 (6.1) years, 204 (2.1%) of whom identified as Asian/Pacific Islander, 2720 (28.5%) as Black, 500 (5.2%) as Hispanic/Latino, and 5356 (56.1%) as White. The MarketScan cohort consisted of 1 306 408 unexposed and 1221 exposed pregnancies among women with a mean (SD) age of 33.1 (5.0) years; race and ethnicity data were not available. Although the unadjusted results were consistent with an approximate 2-fold increased risk for most exposure-outcome contrasts, risks were no longer meaningfully increased after adjustment (eg, pooled unadjusted vs adjusted hazard ratios [95% CI] for any NDD after any antipsychotic exposure: 1.91 [1.79-2.03] vs 1.08 [1.01-1.17]), with the possible exception of aripiprazole (1.36 [1.14-1.63]). Results were consistent across sensitivity analyses. Conclusions and Relevance: The findings of this birth cohort study suggest that the increased risk of NDD seen in children born to women who took antipsychotic drugs late in pregnancy seems to be explained by maternal characteristics and is not causally related with prenatal antipsychotic exposure. This finding highlights the importance of closely monitoring the neurodevelopment of the offspring of women with mental illness to ensure early intervention and support. The potential signal for aripiprazole requires replication in other data before causality can be assumed.
35343876|a|Common neurological disorders, including neurodegenerative diseases, stroke, epilepsy, autism and psychiatric disorders, affect many people worldwide and threaten their lives and health by inducing movement disorders, behavioral disorders, or a combination of both. Oxidative stress and neuroinflammation play a central role in neuronal damage and neurological diseases induction and progression. In addition, protein homeostasis (proteostasis) impairment occurs in many neurodegenerative diseases, which plays a critical role in the progression of the pathology. Grape seed contains several flavonoids and non-flavonoids and exerts potent antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects. In addition, polyphenols and flavanols can maintain cellular proteostasis. Since impaired proteostasis is closely involved in all amyloid diseases, particularly neurodegenerative diseases, grape seeds extract can be a valuable therapeutic agent. Therefore, this review discusses the protective and therapeutic mechanisms of grape seed against neurological disorders and, in the end, links GSE to microRNAs as future therapeutic developments.
35343818|a|Introduction: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of heterogeneous neurodevelopmental conditions affecting social communication and social interaction. Medical cannabis (MC) treatment shows promising results as an approach to reduce behavioral difficulties, as determined mainly by subjective observations. We have recently shown the potential of cannabis-responsive biomarkers detected in saliva of children with ASD to objectively quantify the impact of successful MC treatment using a metabolomics approach. Since the pathology of ASD is associated with abnormal lipid metabolism, we used lipidomics on the same samples to (1) expand the repertoire of cannabis-responsive biomarkers and (2) provide preliminary insight into the role of MC on lipid metabolism. Materials and Methods: Saliva samples collected from children with ASD (n=15) treated with MC (both before and at the time of maximal impact of treatment) and an age-matched group of typically developing (TD) children (n=9) were subjected to untargeted lipidomics. The study was observational. Each child from the ASD group was receiving a unique individualized MC treatment regimen using off-the-shelf products as permitted by California law under physician supervision for at least 1 year. Doses of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) ranged from 0.05 to 50 mg and cannabidiol (CBD) from 7.5 to 200 mg per treatment. The ASD group was evaluated for signs of improvement using parental brief Likert scale surveys. Results: Twenty-two potential lipid-based cannabis-responsive biomarkers exhibiting a shift toward the TD physiological levels in children with ASD after MC treatment were identified. Members from all five lipid subclasses known to be present in saliva were characterized. Preliminary lipid association network analysis suggests involvement of two subnetworks previously linked to (1) inflammation and/or redox regulation and (2) oxidative stress. The significant changes in sphingomyelin in this study and in N-acetyl-aspartate (NAA) previously detected in the metabolomics analysis of the same saliva samples may indicate a role of MC in neuron function. Conclusions: Our findings suggest that lipid metabolites in saliva can potentially serve as cannabis-responsive biomarkers and objectively quantify the impact of MC treatment, and indicate a possible mechanism of action for MC. This preliminary study requires further investigation with a larger population and appropriate clinical trial monitoring.
35343647|a|BACKGROUND: Schaaf-Yang syndrome (SYS) is a rare hereditary disease caused by truncating point mutations of the paternal allele of melanoma antigen L2 (MAGEL2), one of five protein-coding genes within the Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) critical domain. SYS shares many clinical and molecular characteristics with PWS but has some distinct features, such as joint contractures and autism. Patients with PWS show abnormal electroencephalography (EEG) patterns. However, there are very few reports on EEG findings in patients with SYS. METHODS: A SYS patient was included in this study. Detailed neurological examinations and EEG were performed from neonate to infant ages. Sanger sequencing was performed. RESULTS: Our patient presented abnormal EEG findings and had diffuse brain dysfunction symptoms including a reduced level of consciousness, diminished spontaneous movements, hypotonia, feeding difficulties, and hypoventilation from early after birth. As she grew older and her background activity of EEG normalized, her neurodevelopmental symptoms remained but improved. Sanger sequencing of this patient revealed a novel, heterozygous c.2005C > T, truncating mutation in the MEGAL2 gene. CONCLUSIONS: We described an SYS-associated, time-dependent, EEG pattern in a patient with SYS. Our findings of longitudinal EEG changes in a patient with SYS revealed a specific pattern of how affected individuals develop brain function.
35343409|a|Adults with neurodevelopmental disorders frequently present to, but fit uneasily into, adult mental health services. We offer definitions of important terms related to neurodevelopmental disorders through unifying research data, medical and other viewpoints. This may improve understanding, clinical practice and development of neurodevelopmental disorder pathways within adult mental health services.
35342939|a|BACKGROUND: Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) have considerable overlap, supporting the need for a dimensional framework that examines neurodevelopmental domains which cross traditional diagnostic boundaries. In the following study, we use factor analysis to deconstruct the ASD-ADHD phenotype into its underlying phenotypic domains and test for measurement invariance across adaptive functioning, age, gender and ASD/ADHD clinical diagnoses. METHODS: Participants included children and youth (aged 3-20 years) with a clinical diagnosis of ASD (n = 727) or ADHD (n = 770) for a total of 1,497 participants. Parents of these children completed the Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ), a measure of autism symptoms, and the Strengths and Weaknesses of ADHD and Normal Behaviour (SWAN) questionnaire, a measure of ADHD symptoms. An exploratory factor analysis (EFA) was performed on combined SCQ and SWAN items. This was followed by a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) and tests of measurement invariance. RESULTS: EFA revealed a four-factor solution (inattention, hyperactivity/impulsivity, social-communication, and restricted, repetitive, behaviours and interests (RRBI)) and a CFA confirmed good model fit. This solution also showed good model fit across subgroups of interest. CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows that a combined ASD-ADHD phenotype is characterized by two latent ASD domains (social communication and RRBIs) and two latent ADHD domains (inattention and hyperactivity/impulsivity). We established measurement invariance of the derived measurement model across adaptive functioning, age, gender and ASD/ADHD diagnoses.
35342866|a|Reliable and accurate visual analysis of graphically depicted behavioral data acquired using single-case experimental designs (SCEDs) is integral to behavior-analytic research and practice. Researchers have developed a range of techniques to increase reliable and objective visual inspection of SCED data including visual interpretive guides, statistical techniques, and nonstatistical quantitative methods to objectify the visual-analytic interpretation of data to guide clinicians, and ensure a replicable data interpretation process in research. These structured data analytic practices are now more frequently used by behavior analysts and the subject of considerable research within the field of quantitative methods and behavior analysis. First, there are contemporaneous analytic methods that have preliminary support with simulated datasets, but have not been thoroughly examined with nonsimulated clinical datasets. There are a number of relatively new techniques that have preliminary support (e.g., fail-safe k), but require additional research. Other analytic methods (e.g., dual-criteria and conservative dual criteria) have more extensive support, but have infrequently been compared against other analytic methods. Across three studies, we examine how these methods corresponded to clinical outcomes (and one another) for the purpose of replicating and extending extant literature in this area. Implications and recommendations for practitioners and researchers are discussed.
35342855|a|One of the greatest achievements of genetics in the 20th century is D.K. Belyaev's discovery of destabilizing selection during the domestication of animals and that this selection affects only gene expression regulation (not gene structure) and inf luences systems of neuroendocrine control of ontogenesis in a stressful environment. Among the experimental data generalized by Belyaev's discovery, there are also f indings about accelerated extinc tion of testes' hormonal function and disrupted seasonality of reproduction of domesticated foxes in comparison with their wild congeners. To date, Belyaev's discovery has already been repeatedly conf irmed, for example, by independent observations during deer domestication, during the use of rats as laboratory animals, after the reintroduction of endangered species such as Przewalski's horse, and during the creation of a Siberian reserve population of the Siberian grouse when it had reached an endangered status in natural habitats. A genome-wide comparison among humans, several domestic animals, and some of their wild congeners has given rise to the concept of self-domestication syndrome, which includes autism spectrum disorders. In our previous study, we created a bioinformatic model of human self-domestication syndrome using differentially expressed genes (DEGs; of domestic animals versus their wild congeners) orthologous to the human genes (mainly, nervous-system genes) whose changes in expression affect reproductive potential, i. e., growth of the number of humans in the absence of restrictions caused by limiting factors. Here, we applied this model to 68 human genes whose changes in expression alter the reproductive health of women and men and to 3080 DEGs of domestic versus wild animals. As a result, in domestic animals, we identif ied 16 and 4 DEGs, the expression changes of which are codirected with changes in the expression of the human orthologous genes decreasing and increasing human reproductive potential, respectively. The wild animals had 9 and 11 such DEGs, respectively. This difference between domestic and wild animals was signif icant according to Pearson's chi2 test (p < 0.05) and Fisher's exact test (p < 0.05). We discuss the results from the standpoint of restoration of endangered animal species whose natural habitats are subject to an anthropogenic impact.
35342389|a|Autism is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder. However, its etiology is still unknown. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are key post-transcriptional regulators. They play an important role in neurodevelopment and brain functions and may be involved in the pathogenesis of autism. Previous studies indicated altered expression of miRNAs in patients with autism. However, the findings were not consistent, and further explorations were needed. This study aimed to investigate whether miRNAs were dysregulated in autism. We examined the expression of 30 brain-specific autism-associated miRNAs in 110 patients with autism and 113 controls in the Han Chinese population using quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. The results demonstrated that 10 miRNAs (hsa-miR-191-5p, hsa-miR-151a-3p, hsa-miR-139-5p, hsa-miR-181a-5p, hsa-miR-432-5p, hsa-miR-181b-5p, hsa-miR-195-5p, hsa-miR-328-3p, hsa-miR-106a-5p, and hsa-miR-484) were significantly differentially expressed (false discovery rate <0.05). All of them were up-regulated in patients with autism compared with controls. The targets of these miRNAs were enriched for genes and pathways related to neurodevelopment, brain functions and autism. These findings suggested the participation of these 10 miRNAs in the pathogenesis of autism in the Han Chinese population.
35341582|a|BACKGROUND: The amygdala is widely implicated in both anxiety and autism spectrum disorder. However, no studies have investigated the relationship between co-occurring anxiety and longitudinal amygdala development in autism. Here, the authors characterize amygdala development across childhood in autistic children with and without traditional DSM forms of anxiety and anxieties distinctly related to autism. METHODS: Longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging scans were acquired at up to four time points for 71 autistic and 55 typically developing (TD) children (~2.5-12 years, 411 time points). Traditional DSM anxiety and anxieties distinctly related to autism were assessed at study time 4 (~8-12 years) using a diagnostic interview tailored to autism: the Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule-IV with the Autism Spectrum Addendum. Mixed-effects models were used to test group differences at study time 1 (3.18 years) and time 4 (11.36 years) and developmental differences (age-by-group interactions) in right and left amygdala volume between autistic children with and without DSM or autism-distinct anxieties and TD children. RESULTS: Autistic children with DSM anxiety had significantly larger right amygdala volumes than TD children at both study time 1 (5.10% increase) and time 4 (6.11% increase). Autistic children with autism-distinct anxieties had significantly slower right amygdala growth than TD, autism-no anxiety, and autism-DSM anxiety groups and smaller right amygdala volumes at time 4 than the autism-no anxiety (-8.13% decrease) and autism-DSM anxiety (-12.05% decrease) groups. CONCLUSIONS: Disparate amygdala volumes and developmental trajectories between DSM and autism-distinct forms of anxiety suggest different biological underpinnings for these common, co-occurring conditions in autism.
35341433|a|INTRODUCTION: Autism, like other neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), has a strong association with epilepsy. There are known common genetic pathways in both autism and epilepsy. There are also specific genetic syndromes associated with both complex epilepsy and the autism phenotype. AREAS COVERED: This review explores the evidence for common genetic etiologies and pathophysiological pathways in relation to both epilepsy and autism. Autism with comorbid epilepsy are associated with a high prevalence of medical and psychiatric comorbidities. This paper discusses how this influences assessment, treatment, and outcomes. The evidence for the treatment of specific seizure types in the context of NDDs is also examined alongside clinical commentary. EXPERT OPINION: Despite the strong association, there is a limited evidence base to support the efficacy and tolerability of anti-seizure medications specifically in autism, with no Level 1 evidence or National Guidance available. Autism and epilepsy should be approached under a NDD model with cautious introduction and titration of anti-seizure medication. Alongside this, there is evidence to support a move toward precision medicine in specific genetic syndromes such as Tuberous Sclerosis Complex and other genetic seizure disorders. The first-line treatments that should be considered for focal seizures include carbamazepine, lamotrigine, and levetiracetam.
35341016|a|Accumulating evidence suggests that functional Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS) can provide an essential bridge between our current understanding of neural circuit organization and cortical activity in the developing brain. Indeed, fNIRS allows studying brain functions through the measurement of neurovascular coupling that links neural activity to subsequent changes in cerebral blood flow and hemoglobin oxygenation levels. While the literature offers a multitude of fNIRS applications to typical development, only recently this tool has been extended to the study of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). The exponential rise of scientific publications on this topic during the last years reflects the interest to identify a "fNIRS signature" as a biomarker of high translational value to support both early clinical diagnosis and treatment outcome. The purpose of this systematic review is to describe the updating clinical applications of fNIRS in NDDs, with a specific focus on preschool population. Starting from this rationale, a systematic search was conducted for relevant studies in different scientific databases (Pubmed, Scopus, and Web of Science) resulting in 13 published articles. In these studies, fNIRS was applied in individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) or infants at high risk of developing ASD. Both functional connectivity in resting-state conditions and task-evoked brain activation using multiple experimental paradigms were used in the selected investigations, suggesting that fNIRS might be considered a promising method for identifying early quantitative biomarkers in the autism field.
35340453|a|Evaluations of all Arabic speaking children age 3-9.0 years with significant speech delays or impairments, referred to a community based, child development center in the public health care system during a 5-year period were reviewed. Use of an inordinate degree of words and expressions in Fossha version of classical Arabic, mainly used in the media, children's literature and formalized venues, as well as in English, was highly associated with ASD, especially among those who were both more intelligent (IQ> 70), as well as older (greater than 4 years), (Pearson 7.29, Fisher 2-tailed test, p = 0.015). The use of "out of context" speech embedded in ordinary Arabic vernacular was associated with a higher degree of speech stereotypy (p < 0.001) among children with ASD, and unrelated statistically to the number of hours of screen viewing time, jargoning or associative speech. Idiosyncratic speech choices reflect neuro-linguistic mechanisms in social communication- impaired youngsters.
35340390|a|The Promoting the Emergence of Advanced Knowledge (PEAK) Relational Training System provides a comprehensive language and cognition training strategy for use with children with disabilities. In the present study, we conducted PEAK within a special education classroom over the course of 3 months, and language and cognitive skills were assessed using the PEAK Comprehensive Assessment (PCA). On average, each of the five participants mastered 11.2 target programs across PEAK modules with an average of 186.4 new verbal behaviors or supporting behaviors. All participants showed an increase on the PCA following the intervention, with an average increase of 39.6 correct responses, and parents and staff reported improvements in participants' use of language at home and at school relative to prior semesters. Supplementary Information: The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s40617-021-00657-6.
35340388|a|The current study evaluated the effect of brief, daily present moment awareness activities on the work performance of paraprofessionals working at a school for children with disabilities. A nonconcurrent multiple-baseline design across three participants evaluated changes in staff-initiated interactions with students and staff's accuracy of data collection on student behavior. Relative to baseline, participants demonstrated an average increase in staff-initiated interactions and an increase in the average percentage accuracy of data collection. Participants averaged 10.02 (range 3.4-16.67) staff-initiated interactions during baseline and 15.38 (range 9.75-24.4) during the intervention phase. Relative to baseline, two of the three participants demonstrated an increase in their average accuracy of data collection on student behavior. Participants' average data collection accuracy was 56.9% (range 40%-86.67%) during baseline and 91.98% (range 86.41%-100%) during intervention. The average percentage of nonoverlapping data was 61.67% (range 25%-100%) for staff-initiated interactions and 33.33% (range 0%-100%) for data collection accuracy. Implications and possibilities for future research related to acceptance and commitment training interventions in workplace environments are discussed.
35340380|a|Acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) is a contemporary approach to dealing with unhelpful private events and improving psychological flexibility (Hayes et al., 2006) that is often used in psychotherapy (Szabo, 2019). Nonpsychotherapeutic uses of ACT have been referred to as acceptance and commitment training (ACTraining; Moran, 2011, 2015; Szabo, 2019), which refers to the use of one or more of six processes-present moment attention or mindfulness, values clarification, committed action, self-as-context, defusion, and acceptance (Hayes et al., 2006)-implemented outside of psychotherapeutic settings. There has been a recent increase in interest in ACTraining within the behavior-analytic community, which has led behavior analysts to question whether ACTraining is useful to the field of applied behavior analysis (ABA) and whether it is within the scope of practice of behavior analysts. Tarbox et al. (2020) proposed that the use of ACTraining is within the scope of practice of behavior analysts and aligns with the seven dimensions of ABA as outlined by Baer et al. (1968). The purpose of the current study was to provide a systematic review of single-case research designs that measure the behavioral effects of ACTraining components conducted with individuals with autism spectrum disorder or developmental disorders, their parents, and their staff, and to inform clinicians and researchers about what variables have been evaluated and what gaps still exist.
35340378|a|The current study investigated the effect of relational training on improving engagement during acceptance and commitment training (ACT) sessions that aimed to reduce maladaptive behavior. Three female children diagnosed with autism participated in the current research. The relational training protocol involved eight programs designed to improve participants' ability to engage in relational responding. A concurrent multiple-baseline across-participants design was used, and participants' maladaptive behavior during ACT sessions was recorded. Results indicated a decrease in maladaptive behavior for one of the three participants, with a medium to large treatment effect. A secondary measure also showed improvement in all three participants' performance during ACT sessions. The percentage of nonoverlapping data and Cohen's d suggest a small to moderate treatment effect. Implications for implementing ACT with individuals diagnosed with autism are discussed.
35340374|a|Jack Michael dedicated his life to teaching behavior analysis. He was passionate about Skinner's works and his enthusiasm was contagious. Jack's primary goal for his students was that they be able to analyze behavior like Skinner analyzed behavior, but with a little bit of Jack Michael sprinkled in here and there. Jack is probably best known to behavior analysts for his conceptual contributions to our field (e.g., his work on motivation), but his contributions to the treatment of autism are perhaps his most socially significant achievement. In our tribute to Jack, we will describe how he advanced the treatment of autism not only through his conceptual work and his teaching, but through his role in the development of applied behavior analysis, and in the application of Skinner's (1957) analysis of verbal behavior to language assessment and intervention for children and adults with language delays.
35340043|a|OBJECTIVE: Collier/Olf/EBF (COE) transcription factors have distinct expression patterns in the developing and mature nervous system. To date, a neurological disease association has been conclusively established for only the Early B-cell Factor-3 (EBF3) COE family member through the identification of heterozygous loss-of-function variants in individuals with autism spectrum/neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD). Here, we identify a symptom severity risk association with missense variants primarily disrupting the zinc finger domain (ZNF) in EBF3-related NDD. METHODS: A phenotypic assessment of 41 individuals was combined with a literature meta-analysis for a total of 83 individuals diagnosed with EBF3-related NDD. Quantitative diagnostic phenotypic and symptom severity scales were developed to compare EBF3 variant type and location to identify genotype-phenotype correlations. To stratify the effects of EBF3 variants disrupting either the DNA-binding domain (DBD) or the ZNF, we utilized in vivo fruit fly UAS-GAL4 expression and in vitro luciferase assays. RESULTS: We show that patient symptom severity correlates with EBF3 missense variants perturbing the ZNF, which is a key protein domain required for stabilizing the interaction between EBF3 and the target DNA sequence. We found that ZNF-associated variants failed to restore viability in the fruit fly and impaired transcriptional activation. However, the recurrent variant EBF3 p.Arg209Trp in the DBD is capable of partially rescuing viability in the fly and preserved transcriptional activation. INTERPRETATION: We describe a symptom severity risk association with ZNF perturbations and EBF3 loss-of-function in the largest reported cohort to date of EBF3-related NDD patients. This analysis should have potential predictive clinical value for newly identified patients with EBF3 gene variants. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
35339642|a|OBJECTIVE: Emerging evidence suggests that acupuncture plays a neuroprotective role in autism. This study aimed to explore the effect of electroacupuncture at Zusanli (ST36) on autistic-like behaviors and the underlying mechanism. METHOD: Pregnant rats were administered with valproic acid (VPA) on gestational day 12.5 to induce an autism spectrum disorder (ASD) model. The pups were given electroacupuncture at ST36 daily from postnatal day (PND)28-48. On PND28, the adenoviral vector containing small interfering RNA Nrf2 (Ad-siRNA-Nrf2) was injected into the prefrontal cortex of rats. The behavioral analysis was performed on PND 44-48. On PND48, the animals were euthanized and the brains were collected for further detection. Nissl staining was performed to detect neuronal viability. The biochemical markers of oxidative stress were subsequently measured. RESULT: Electroacupuncture at ST36 ameliorated the locomotor activity, social behavior, spatial learning and memory and repetitive behavior compared with ASD rats. It was notable that the electroacupuncture decreased oxidative stress markers in the tissues of prefrontal cortex, enhanced translocation of nuclear factor erythroid2-related factor2 (Nrf2) from cytoplasm to nucleus, and up-regulated the levels of NADP(H) quinone oxidoreductase (NQO1) and heme oxygenase (HO-1). However, these effects induced by electroacupuncture at ST36 were abolished after injection of Ad-siRNA-Nrf2. CONCLUSION: These data suggested that electroacupuncture at ST36 protected nerve function in ASD rats through Nrf2 activation and the antioxidant response.
35338994|a|Individuals diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) demonstrate atypical development of receptive language and object category knowledge. Yet, little is known about the emerging relation between these two competencies in this population. The present study utilized a gaze-based paradigm, the visual array task (VAT), to examine the relation between object label and object category knowledge in a sample of toddlers at heightened genetic risk for developing ASD. Eighty-eight toddlers with at least one typically developing older sibling (low-risk; LR) or one older sibling diagnosed with ASD (high-risk; HR) completed the VAT at 17 (LR n = 20; HR n = 27) and/or 25 months of age (LR n = 42; HR n = 22). Results indicated that the VAT was both a sensitive measure of receptive vocabulary as well as capable of reflecting gains in category knowledge for toddlers at genetic risk of developing ASD. Notably, an early emerging difference in the relation between target label knowledge and category knowledge for the groups was observed at 17 months of age but dissipated by 25 months of age. This suggests that while the link between receptive vocabulary and category knowledge may develop earlier in LR groups, HR groups may potentially catch up by the second year of life. Therefore, it is likely meaningful to consider differences in category knowledge when conceptualizing the receptive language deficits associated with HR populations. During language learning, typically developing children are sensitive to the common features of category members and use this information to generalize known object labels to newly encountered exemplars. The inability to identify similarities between category members and/or utilize this information when learning new object referents at 17 months of age may be a potential mechanism underlying the delays observed in HR populations.
35338846|a|Findings of the fatty acid status of people with autism spectrum disorders have been incongruent perhaps because of the diversity of the condition. A cross-sectional design study was used to  investigated fatty acid levels and relationships between fatty acids, and cognition and behaviour in a homogenous group of children with autism spectrum disorder. Children with Asperger's syndrome (AS) /high functioning autism (n = 44) and healthy siblings (n = 17) were recruited from the Diagnostic and Therapeutic Centre for Children with Autism, Warsaw, Poland. In the AS group, plasma phosphatidylcholine 22:5n3 correlated positively with verbal (r = 0.357, p = 0.019) and full scale (r = 0.402, p = 0.008) IQs, red blood cell phosphatidylcholine 22:5n3 with verbal (r = 0.308, p = 0.044), performance (r = 0.304, p = 0.047) and full scale (r = 0.388, p = 0.011) IQs and red blood cell phosphatidylethanolamine 22:5n3 with verbal (r = 0.390, p = 0.010) and full scale (r = 0.370, p = 0.016) IQs. Whilst, plasma phosphatidycholine 20:5n3 (r = -0.395, p = 0.009), 22:6n3 (r = -0.402, p = 0.007) and total n3 fatty acids (r = -425, p = 0.005), red blood cell phosphatidlycholine 20:5n3 (r = -0.321, p = 0.036) and red blood cell phosphatidylethanolamine 20:5n3 (r = -0.317, p = 0.038), 22:6n3 (r = -0.297, p = 0.05) and total n3 fatty acids (r = -0.306, p = 0.046) correlated inversly with ADHD index. Similarly, inattention was negatively related with plasma phosphatidylcholine 22:6n3 (r = -0.335, p = 0.028), and total n3 fatty acids (r = -0.340, p = 0.026), oppositional with plasma phosphatidylcholine 18:3n3 (r = -0.333, p = 0.029), 20:5n3 (r = -0.365, p = 0.016), total n3 fatty acids (r = -0.293, p < 0.05), red blood cell phosphatidylcholine 18:3n3 (r = -0.337, p = 0.027) and red blood cell ethanolamine 18:3n3 (r = - 0.333, p = 0.029), 20:5n3 (r = -0.328, p = 0.032), 22:6n3 (r = 0.362, p = 0.017) and total n-3 fatty acids (r = -0.298, p < 0.05) and hyperactivity with plasma phosphatidylcholine 22:6n3 (r = -0.320, p = 0.039). In contrast, there were inverse correlations between red blood cell phosphatidylcholine 18:2n6 and performance (r = -0.358, p = 0.019) and full scale (r = -0.320, p = 0.039) IQs, and direct correlations between red blood cell phosphatidylcholine 22:4n6 (r = 0.339, p = 0.026) and 22:5n6 (r = 0.298, p < 0.05) and ADHD index, between red blood cell phosphatidylcholine 22:4n6 (r = 0.308, p = 0.044) and inattention, between plasma phosphatidylcholine 22:4n6 (r = 0.341, p = 0.025), red blood cell phosphatidylcholine 20:4n6 (r = 0.314, p = 0.041) and total n6 fatty acids (r = 0.336, p = 0.028) and oppositional and plasma phosphatidylcholine 20:3n6 (r = 0.362, p = 0.018) and red blood cell phosphatidylcholine 20:3n6 (r = 0.401, p = 0.009) and hyperactivity. The findings of the ethnically homogenous children with Asperger's syndrome/high functioning autism study revealed positive associations between 22:5n3 and cognition, and negative relationships between 20:5n3 and 22:6n3 and behavioural problem. In contrast, cognitive ability and behavioural problems were negatively and positively associated with n6 fatty acids. Further investigation is required to establish whether there a cause and effect relationship. Regardless, it would be prudent to ensure that children with the conditions have optimum n3 PUFA intake.
35338788|a|
35338618|a|INTRODUCTION: The main objective of this study was to determine the prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) in Down Syndrome (DS) children attending the DS clinic at Child Development Centre Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre (CDC-UKMMC) and to assess the appropriateness of using an M-CHAT as an ASD screener in this population. We traced the karyotype results of our study population from their medical record and compared this to study participant with a dual diagnosis of Down Syndrome- Autism Spectrum Disorder (DS-ASD). Lastly, we assessed the awareness among parents attending our DS follow up clinic regarding the possibility of an ASD diagnosis in DS children. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This a single-centre cross-sectional study among DS children aged 18-60 months who attend the DS follow up clinic in UKMMC. Overall, 24 children were recruited to our study. The accompanying parent was given the Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT) questionnaire and a data collection sheet prior to their consultation. The chromosomal study was traced from their medical case notes. Children that were eligible for the study had their development assessed using the tool Schedule of Growing Skills II. The diagnosis of ASD was determined by the attending paediatrician using The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5 (DSM-5) criteria. RESULTS: The prevalence of dual diagnoses DS-ASD in our study population was 4.2%. Using M-CHAT as a screener, 8 children failed the M-CHAT, of whom only one was diagnosed with ASD. None of the children that passed the MCHAT was diagnosed with ASD. Only 17 chromosomal study results were available for analysis, 2 children had mosaic DS whereas the remaining was caused by non-disjunction; the only DS-ASD patient had non-disjunction. Regarding parental awareness of dual diagnoses of ASD and DS, about 60% of the parents attending UKMMC clinic were aware of the possibility of ASD-DS diagnosis. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that ASD prevalence in our DS study population is consistent with those previously reported, and that paediatricians managing DS children should be aware of the dual diagnoses of ASD and DS when managing these patients. Even though, we are unable to make a definitive conclusion regarding the use of M-CHAT in this population of children due to the very small sample size, possibly a multi-centre research in the future may help elucidate this issue.
35338609|a|Emotion recognition difficulties are considered to contribute to social-communicative problems for autistic individuals. Prior research has been dominated by a focus on forced-choice recognition response accuracy for static face presentations of basic emotions, often involving small samples. Using free-report and multiple-choice response formats, we compared emotion recognition in IQ-matched autistic (N = 63) and nonautistic (N = 67) adult samples using 12 face emotion stimuli presented in three different stimulus formats (static, dynamic, social) that varied the degree of accompanying contextual information. Percent agreement with normative recognition responses (usually labeled "recognition accuracy") was slightly lower for autistic adults. Both groups displayed marked inter-individual variability and, although there was considerable overlap between groups, a very small subset of autistic individuals recorded lower percent agreement than any of the nonautistic sample. Overall, autistic individuals were significantly slower to respond and less confident. Although stimulus type, response format, and emotion affected percent agreement, latency and confidence, their interactions with group were nonsignificant and the associated effect sizes extremely small. The findings challenge notions that autistic adults have core deficits in emotion recognition and are more likely than nonautistic adults to be overwhelmed by increasingly dynamic or complex emotion stimuli and to experience difficulties recognizing specific emotions. Suggested research priorities include clarifying whether longer recognition latencies reflect fundamental processing limitations or adjustable strategic influences, probing age-related changes in emotion recognition across adulthood, and identifying the links between difficulties highlighted by traditional emotion recognition paradigms and real-world social functioning. LAY SUMMARY: It is generally considered that autistic individuals are less accurate than nonautistic individuals at recognizing other people's facial emotions. Using a wide array of emotions presented in various contexts, this study suggests that autistic individuals are, on average, only slightly less accurate but at the same time somewhat slower when classifying others' emotions. However, there was considerable overlap between the two groups, and great variability between individuals. The differences between groups prevailed regardless of how stimuli were presented, the response required or the particular emotion.
35338449|a|Trace elements are essential for the human body's various physiological processes but if they are present in higher concentration, these elements turn to be toxic and cause adverse effect on physiological processes. Similarly, deficiency of these essential elements also affects physiological processes and leads to abnormal metabolic activities. There is a lot of interest in recent years to know the mystery behind the involvement of trace elements in the metabolic activities of autistic children suspecting that it may be a risk factor in the aetiology of autism. The present study aims to analyse the plasma trace elements in autistic children using the total reflection X-ray fluorescence (TXRF) technique. Plasma samples from 70 autistic children (mean age: 11.5 +- 3.1) were analysed with 70 age- and sex-matched healthy children as controls (mean age: 12 +- 2.5). TXRF analysis revealed the higher concentration of copper (1227.8 +- 17.8), chromium (7.1 +- 2.5), bromine (2695.1 +- 24) and arsenic (126.3 +- 10) and lower concentration of potassium (440.1 +- 25), iron (1039.6 +- 28), zinc (635.7 +- 21), selenium (52.3 +- 8.5), rubidium (1528.9 +- 28) and molybdenum (162,800.8 +- 14) elements in the plasma of autistic children in comparison to healthy controls. Findings of the first study from India suggest these altered concentrations in elements in autistic children over normal healthy children affect the physiological processes and metabolism. Further studies are needed to clarify the association between the altered element concentration and physiology of autism in the North Karnataka population in India.
35338437|a|Depression and sensory reactivity are both common in autism. However, there is little understanding of the predictive relationship between these factors, or the nature of this relationship in autistic children who speak few to no words. This study set out to explore the longitudinal relationship between sensory reactivity and depressive symptoms in 33 young autistic children who speak few to no words. We found positive correlations between depressive symptoms and hyper-reactivity and sensory seeking at both timepoints, and across timepoints. We further found a bidirectional predictive relationship between depressive symptoms and sensory seeking. These results implicate sensory seeking in the development of depressive symptoms in young autistic children who use few to no words. Our findings have important implications for preventative mental health interventions, especially for those with a developmental language delay.
35338178|a|Children with an Autism Spectrum Condition (ASC) have social communication and perceptuomotor difficulties that affect their ability to engage in dyadic play. In this study, we compared spatio-temporal errors and fNIRS-related cortical activation between children with and without an ASC during a Lincoln Log dyadic game requiring them to play leader or follower roles, move in synchrony or while taking turns, and move cooperatively or competitively with an adult partner. Children with an ASC had greater motor, planning, and spatial errors and took longer to complete the building tasks compared to typically developing (TD) children. Children with an ASC had lower superior temporal sulcus (STS) activation during Turn-take and Compete, and greater Inferior Parietal Lobe (IPL) activation during Lead and Turn-take compared to TD children. As dyadic play demands increased, TD children showed greater STS activation during Turn-take (vs. Synchrony) and Compete (vs. Cooperate) whereas children with an ASC showed greater IPL activation during Lead and Compete (vs. Cooperate). Our findings suggest that children with an ASC rely on self-generated action plans (i.e., increased IPL activation) more than relying on their partner's action cues (i.e., reduced STS activation) when engaging in dyadic play including joint actions and competition.
35338117|a|Pharmacological inhibition of phosphodiesterase 2A (PDE2A), which catalyzes the hydrolysis of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), has recently been proposed as a novel therapeutic tool for Fragile X Syndrome (FXS), the leading monogenic cause of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Here, we investigated the role of PDE2A in ASD pathogenesis using two rat models that reflect one of either the genetic or environmental factors involved in the human disease: the genetic Fmr1-Deltaexon 8 rat model and the environmental rat model based on prenatal exposure to valproic acid (VPA, 500 mg/kg). Prior to behavioral testing, the offspring was treated with the PDE2A inhibitor BAY607550 (0.05 mg/kg at infancy, 0.1 mg/kg at adolescence and adulthood). Socio-communicative symptoms were assessed in both models through the ultrasonic vocalization test at infancy and three-chamber test at adolescence and adulthood, while cognitive impairments were assessed by the novel object recognition test in Fmr1-Deltaexon 8 rats (adolescence and adulthood) and by the inhibitory avoidance test in VPA-exposed rats (adulthood). PDE2A enzymatic activity in VPA-exposed infant rats was also assessed. In line with the increased PDE2A enzymatic activity previously observed in the brain of Fmr1-KO animals, we found an altered upstream regulation of PDE2A activity in the brain of VPA-exposed rats at an early developmental age (p < 0.05). Pharmacological inhibition of PDE2A normalized the communicative (p < 0.01, p < 0.05), social (p < 0.001, p < 0.05), and cognitive impairment (p < 0.001) displayed by both Fmr1-Deltaexon 8 and VPA-exposed rats. Altogether, these data highlight a key role of PDE2A in brain development and point to PDE2A inhibition as a promising pharmacological approach for the deficits common to both FXS and ASD.
35338081|a|
35337376|a|Women and men are suggested to have differences in vulnerability to neuropsychiatric disorders, including major depressive disorder (MDD), generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), schizophrenia, eating disorders, including anorexia nervosa, and bulimia nervosa, neurodevelopmental disorders, such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and neurodegenerative disorders including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease. Genetic factors and sex hormones are apparently the main mediators of these differences. Recent evidence uncovers that reciprocal interactions between sex-related features (e.g., sex hormones and sex differences in the brain) and gut microbiota could play a role in the development of neuropsychiatric disorders via influencing the gut-brain axis. It is increasingly evident that sex-microbiota-brain interactions take part in the occurrence of neurologic and psychiatric disorders. Accordingly, integrating the existing evidence might help to enlighten the fundamental roles of these interactions in the pathogenesis of neuropsychiatric disorders. In addition, an increased understanding of the biological sex differences on the microbiota-brain may lead to advances in the treatment of neuropsychiatric disorders and increase the potential for precision medicine. This review discusses the effects of sex differences on the brain and gut microbiota and the putative underlying mechanisms of action. Additionally, we discuss the consequences of interactions between sex differences and gut microbiota on the emergence of particular neuropsychiatric disorders.
35334937|a|Magnesium biotinate (MgB) is a novel biotin complex with superior absorption and anti-inflammatory effects in the brain than D-Biotin. This study aimed to investigate the impact of different doses of MgB on social behavior deficits, learning and memory alteration, and inflammatory markers in propionic acid (PPA)-exposed rats. In this case, 35 Wistar rats (3 weeks old) were distributed into five groups: 1, Control; 2, PPA treated group; 3, PPA+MgBI (10 mg, HED); 4, PPA+MgBII (100 mg, HED); 5, PPA+MgBIII (500 mg, HED). PPA was given subcutaneously at 500 mg/kg/day for five days, followed by MgB for two weeks. PPA-exposed rats showed poor sociability and a high level of anxiety-like behaviors and cognitive impairments (p < 0.001). In a dose-dependent manner, behavioral and learning-memory disorders were significantly improved by MgB supplementation (p < 0.05). PPA decreased both the numbers and the sizes of Purkinje cells in the cerebellum. However, MgB administration increased the sizes and the densities of Purkinje cells. MgB improved the brain and serum Mg, biotin, serotonin, and dopamine concentrations, as well as antioxidant enzymes (CAT, SOD, GPx, and GSH) (p < 0.05). In addition, MgB treatment significantly regulated the neurotoxicity-related cytokines and neurotransmission-related markers. For instance, MgB significantly decreased the expression level of TNF-alpha, IL-6, IL-17, CCL-3, CCL-5, and CXCL-16 in the brain, compared to the control group (p < 0.05). These data demonstrate that MgB may ameliorate dysfunctions in social behavior, learning and memory and reduce the oxidative stress and inflammation indexes of the brain in a rat model.
35334286|a|Deficits in olfactory function in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have already been reported. However, the results of previous studies are not consistent, and the pathophysiological mechanisms of olfactory dysfunction in ASD are not clear. Fifty-three male ASD children or teenagers aged 9-16 years were recruited for the study. The identification and discrimination portion of the Sniffin' Sticks test (SST) was used to assess the olfactory function of the enrolled subjects. The severity of ASD core symptoms and the intelligence quotient (IQ) of participants were assessed. In addition, to explore the potential mechanism underlying olfactory dysfunction, a series of plasma biochemical indicators of oxidative stress, mitochondrial function and inflammation were measured. The mean raw scores on the SST identification and discrimination test of the study subjects were significantly lower than those of typically developing subjects reported in normative data studies. After adjusting for IQ, the odor identification score was not significantly associated with any ASD symptoms. Odor identification was found to be significantly associated with the ratio of L-lactate (L)/pyruvate (P) but not with other measured indicators. The current study validates the impairment of odor identification and discrimination in Chinese ASD children. Odor identification dysfunction may be an independent clinical symptom of ASD. The plasma L/P ratio was found to be significantly associated with odor identification performance, which suggests that mitochondrial dysfunction may be a potential mechanism underlying odor identification impairment in ASD.
35333913|a|Adults with intellectual disability have high health care needs. Despite frequent contact with health services, they often receive inadequate health care. One method to improve health care delivery is reasonable adjustments, that is, the adaptation of health care delivery such that barriers to participation are removed for the person with disability. A starting point for the provision of reasonable adjustments is recognition of intellectual disability during the health care contact. To determine rates and predictors of the recognition of intellectual disability during hospital admissions, and its impact on admission metrics, we examined a population of adults with intellectual disability identified from disability services datasets from New South Wales, Australia between 2005 and 2014. Recognition of intellectual disability was determined by the recording of an International Classification of Diseases 10th revision (ICD-10) diagnostic code for intellectual disability during a given hospital admission. We examined how recognition of intellectual disability related to length of hospital episodes. We found an overall low rate of recognition of intellectual disability (23.79%) across all hospital episodes, with the proportion of hospital episodes recognising intellectual disability decreasing from 2005-2015. Admissions for adults with complex health profiles (e.g., those with many comorbidities, those with Autism Spectrum Disorder, and those admitted for urgent treatment) were more likely to recognise intellectual disability, but admissions for adults with complexity in other domains (i.e., for those in custody, or those with drug and alcohol disorders) were less likely to recognise intellectual disability. Recognition of intellectual disability was associated with longer episodes of care, possibly indicating the greater provision of reasonable adjustments. To improve the recognition of intellectual disability for adults during health service contacts, we advocate for the implementation of targeted initiatives (such as a nationwide disability flag to be included in health service records) to improve the provision of reasonable adjustments.
35333369|a|People make flexible decisions across a wide range of contexts to resolve social or moral conflicts. Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) frequently report difficulties in such behaviors, which hinders the flexibility in changing strategies during daily activities or adjustment of perspective during communication. However, the underlying mechanisms of this issue are insufficiently understood. This study aimed to investigate decision flexibility in ASD using a functional magnetic resonance imaging task that involved recognizing and resolving two types of moral dilemma (MD): cost-benefit analysis (CBA) and mitigating inevitable misconducts (MIM). The CBA session assessed the participants' pitting of result-oriented outcomes against distressful harmful actions, whereas the MIM session assessed their pitting of the extenuation of a criminal sentence against a sympathetic situation of defendants suffering from violence or disease. The behavioral outcome in CBA-related flexibility was significantly lower in the ASD group compared to that of the typical development (TD) group. In the corresponding CBA contrast, activation in the left inferior frontal gyrus was lower in the ASD group. Meanwhile, in the MIM-related flexibility, there were no significant group differences in behavioral outcome or brain activity. Our findings add to our understanding of flexible decision-making in ASD.
35333312|a|Temporal lobe epilepsy, a common drug-resistant epilepsy in adults, is primarily a limbic network disorder associated with predominant unilateral hippocampal pathology. Structural MRI has provided an in vivo window into whole-brain grey matter structural alterations in temporal lobe epilepsy relative to controls, by either mapping (i) atypical inter-hemispheric asymmetry; or (ii) regional atrophy. However, similarities and differences of both atypical asymmetry and regional atrophy measures have not been systematically investigated. Here, we addressed this gap using the multisite ENIGMA-Epilepsy dataset comprising MRI brain morphological measures in 732 temporal lobe epilepsy patients and 1418 healthy controls. We compared spatial distributions of grey matter asymmetry and atrophy in temporal lobe epilepsy, contextualized their topographies relative to spatial gradients in cortical microstructure and functional connectivity calculated using 207 healthy controls obtained from Human Connectome Project and an independent dataset containing 23 temporal lobe epilepsy patients and 53 healthy controls and examined clinical associations using machine learning. We identified a marked divergence in the spatial distribution of atypical inter-hemispheric asymmetry and regional atrophy mapping. The former revealed a temporo-limbic disease signature while the latter showed diffuse and bilateral patterns. Our findings were robust across individual sites and patients. Cortical atrophy was significantly correlated with disease duration and age at seizure onset, while degrees of asymmetry did not show a significant relationship to these clinical variables. Our findings highlight that the mapping of atypical inter-hemispheric asymmetry and regional atrophy tap into two complementary aspects of temporal lobe epilepsy-related pathology, with the former revealing primary substrates in ipsilateral limbic circuits and the latter capturing bilateral disease effects. These findings refine our notion of the neuropathology of temporal lobe epilepsy and may inform future discovery and validation of complementary MRI biomarkers in temporal lobe epilepsy.
35333269|a|Many children suffering from autism spectrum disorder (ASD) experience gastrointestinal (GI) conditions. Enterocloster bolteae has been regularly detected in the stool of individuals suffering from GI symptoms and autism. Literature has suggested that E. bolteae strains WAL 16351 and WAL 14578 produce an immunogenic capsular polysaccharide (CPS) comprised of disaccharide repeating units: alpha-D-Man-(1   4)-beta-Rha-(1   3) that could be used for the development of an immunotherapeutic vaccine. Ambiguity in the configuration of rhamnose led to the synthesis of tri- and disaccharide analogues containing D-rhamnose and L-rhamnose, respectively. ROESY-NMR spectra showed that CH3-6 of rhamnose and H-2 of mannose in the L-Rha containing disaccharide gave correlation. No such correlation was seen between the CH3-6 of rhamnose and the H-2 of mannose in the D-Rha containing trisaccharide. Molecular dynamics studies on hexasaccharide containing L-Rha or D-Rha confirmed that these structures adopt conformations resulting in different distances between the C6-rhamnose and the H-2 mannose of the preceding residue. We also demonstrate that assignment of the absolute configuration of the rhamnosyl residue in the beta-Rhap-(1   3)-D-Man linkage can be determined using the 13C chemical shift of C-2 in of D-Mannose. While beta-D-Rha will lead to an upfield shift of C-2 due to gamma-gauche interaction between H-1 Rha and H-2 Man, beta-L-Rha will not. Our results provide insights to distinguish between D- and L-rhamnose in the alpha-D-Manp-(1   4)-beta-Rhap-(1   3) repeating motif.
35332920|a|Psychopathy and autism are both associated with aberrant social skills and empathy, yet only psychopaths are markedly antisocial and violent. Here, we compared the functional neural alterations underlying these two groups that both have aberrant empathetic abilities but distinct behavioral phenotypes. We studied 19 incarcerated male offenders with high psychopathic traits, 20 males with high-functioning autism, and 19 age-matched healthy controls. All groups underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging while they viewed dynamic happy, angry, and disgusted faces or listened to laughter and crying sounds. Psychopathy was associated with reduced somatomotor responses to almost all expressions, while participants with autism demonstrated less marked and emotion-specific alterations in the somatomotor area. These data suggest that psychopathy and autism involve both common and distinct functional alterations in the brain networks involved in the socioemotional processing. The alterations are more profound in psychopathy, possibly reflecting the more severely disturbed socioemotional brain networks in this population.
35332560|a|It is a common practice in public health research that multiple biomarkers are collected to diagnose or predict a disease outcome. A natural question is how to combine multiple biomarkers to improve the diagnostic accuracy. It has been shown by Neyman-Pearson lemma that the likelihood ratio statistic achieves the optimal AUC in theory. However, practical difficulty often lies in the estimation of the multivariate density functions. We propose three novel methods for the biomarker combination, with the idea of breaking down the joint densities to a series of univariate densities. The marginal likelihood ratio approach only assumes the marginal distribution of each biomarker. While the conditional likelihood ratio (CLR) and pseudo likelihood ratio (PLR) approaches assume the conditional distributions of a marker given others, and hence make use of the correlation structure to estimate the combination rules. The proposed methods make it much easier to assume and validate the univariate distributions of a biomarker than making multivariate distributional assumptions. Extensive simulation studies demonstrate that the CLR and the PLR approaches outperform many existing methods, and are therefore recommended for practical use. The proposed methods are motivated by and applied to a biomarker study to diagnose childhood autism/autism spectrum disorder.
35332402|a|We assessed the spoken language of 73 preschool aged children on the autism spectrum receiving community-based early intervention at two time points, approximately 7 months apart. Using the Spoken Language Benchmarks, there was a small non-significant change in the proportion of children transitioning from below, to at or above, Phase 3 (word combinations). Using binomial regression, a model comprising seven of nine clinician-proposed child-related predictors explained 64% of the variance. None of the predictors were individually significant, although a large effect size (OR = 16.71) was observed for children's baseline rate of communicative acts. The findings point to substantial unmet clinical need in children with minimal verbal language, but also the relevance of clinician-proposed predictors of their spoken language outcomes.
35332401|a|Evidence suggests a continuity between obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and schizophrenia. However, the factors that may predict diagnostic progression from OCD to schizophrenia remain unclear. A total of 35,255 adolescents and adults with OCD (ICD-9-CM code: 300.3) were enrolled between 2001 and 2010 and followed up at the end of 2011 for the identification of de novo schizophrenia (ICD-9-CM code: 295). The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate incidence rates, and the Cox regression was used to determine the significance of candidate predictors. At the end of the 11-year follow-up period, the crude cumulative progression rate from OCD to schizophrenia was 6%, and the estimated progression rate totaled 7.80%. Male sex (hazard ratio: 1.23), obesity (1.77), autism spectrum disorder (1.69), bipolar disorder (1.69), posttraumatic stress disorder (1.65), cluster A personality disorder (2.50), and a family history of schizophrenia (2.57) also were related to an elevated likelihood of subsequent progression to schizophrenia in patients with OCD. Further study is necessary to elucidate the exact pathomechanisms underlying diagnostic progression to schizophrenia in patients with OCD.
35332326|a|Chromosomal organization, scaling from the 147-base pair (bp) nucleosome to megabase-ranging domains encompassing multiple transcriptional units, including heritability loci for psychiatric traits, remains largely unexplored in the human brain. In this study, we constructed promoter- and enhancer-enriched nucleosomal histone modification landscapes for adult prefrontal cortex from H3-lysine 27 acetylation and H3-lysine 4 trimethylation profiles, generated from 388 controls and 351 individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia (SCZ) or bipolar disorder (BD) (n = 739). We mapped thousands of cis-regulatory domains (CRDs), revealing fine-grained, 104-106-bp chromosomal organization, firmly integrated into Hi-C topologically associating domain stratification by open/repressive chromosomal environments and nuclear topography. Large clusters of hyper-acetylated CRDs were enriched for SCZ heritability, with prominent representation of regulatory sequences governing fetal development and glutamatergic neuron signaling. Therefore, SCZ and BD brains show coordinated dysregulation of risk-associated regulatory sequences assembled into kilobase- to megabase-scaling chromosomal domains.
35331928|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of neurodevelopmental disorders that cause severe social, communication and behavioral problems. Recent studies show that the variants of a histone methyltransferase gene KMT5B, cause neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), including ASD and the knockout of Kmt5b in mice is embryonic lethal. However, the detailed genotype-phenotype correlations and functional effects of KMT5B in neurodevelopment are unclear. By targeted sequencing of a large Chinese ASD cohort, analyzing published genome-wide sequencing data, and mining literature, we curated 39 KMT5B variants identified from NDD individuals. A genotype-phenotype correlation analysis for ten individuals with KMT5B pathogenic variants reveals common symptoms, including ASD, intellectual disability, languages problem and macrocephaly. In vitro knockdown of the expression of Kmt5b in cultured mouse primary cortical neurons leads to a decrease in neuronal dendritic complexity and an increase in dendritic spine density, which can be rescued by expression of human KMT5B but not that of pathogenic de novo missense mutants. In vivo knockdown of the Kmt5b expression in the mouse embryonic cerebral cortex by in utero electroporation results in decreased proliferation and accelerated migration of neural progenitor cells. Our findings reveal essential roles of histone methyltransferase KMT5B in neuronal development, prenatal neurogenesis, and neuronal migration.
35331004|a|OBJECTIVE: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a lifelong neurodevelopmental condition that is associated with significant difficulties in adaptive behavior and variation in clinical outcomes across the life span. Some individuals with ASD improve, whereas others may not change significantly, or regress. Hence, the development of "personalized medicine" approaches is essential. However, this requires an understanding of the biological processes underpinning differences in clinical outcome, at both the individual and subgroup levels, across the lifespan. METHODS: The authors conducted a longitudinal follow-up study of 483 individuals (204 with ASD and 279 neurotypical individuals, ages 6-30 years), with assessment time points separated by ~12-24 months. Data collected included behavioral data (Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale-II), neuroanatomical data (structural MRI), and genetic data (DNA). Individuals with ASD were grouped into clinically meaningful "increasers," "no-changers," and "decreasers" in adaptive behavior. First, the authors compared neuroanatomy between outcome groups. Next, they examined whether deviations from the neurotypical neuroanatomical profile were associated with outcome at the individual level. Finally, they explored the observed neuroanatomical differences' potential genetic underpinnings. RESULTS: Outcome groups differed in neuroanatomical features (cortical volume and thickness, surface area), including in "social brain" regions previously implicated in ASD. Also, deviations of neuroanatomical features from the neurotypical profile predicted outcome at the individual level. Moreover, neuroanatomical differences were associated with genetic processes relevant to neuroanatomical phenotypes (e.g., synaptic development). CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates, for the first time, that variation in clinical (adaptive) outcome is associated with both group- and individual-level variation in anatomy of brain regions enriched for genes relevant to ASD. This may facilitate the move toward better targeted/precision medicine approaches.
35330929|a|Introduction: The integrity of the intestinal epithelium is crucial for human health and is harmed in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). An aberrant gut microbial composition resulting in gut-derived metabolic toxins was found to damage the intestinal epithelium, jeopardizing tissue integrity. These toxins further reach the brain via the gut-brain axis, disrupting the normal function of the brain. A mechanistic understanding of metabolic disturbances in the brain and gut is essential to design effective therapeutics and early intervention to block disease progression. Herein, we present a novel computational framework integrating constraint based tissue specific metabolic (CBM) model and whole-body physiological pharmacokinetics (PBPK) modeling for ASD. Furthermore, the role of gut microbiota, diet, and oxidative stress is analyzed in ASD. Methods: A representative gut model capturing host-bacteria and bacteria-bacteria interaction was developed using CBM techniques and patient data. Simultaneously, a PBPK model of toxin metabolism was assembled, incorporating multi-scale metabolic information. Furthermore, dynamic flux balance analysis was performed to integrate CBM and PBPK. The effectiveness of a probiotic and dietary intervention to improve autism symptoms was tested on the integrated model. Results: The model accurately highlighted critical metabolic pathways of the gut and brain that are associated with ASD. These include central carbon, nucleotide, and vitamin metabolism in the host gut, and mitochondrial energy and amino acid metabolisms in the brain. The proposed dietary intervention revealed that a high-fiber diet is more effective than a western diet in reducing toxins produced inside the gut. The addition of probiotic bacteria Lactobacillus acidophilus, Bifidobacterium longum longum, Akkermansia muciniphila, and Prevotella ruminicola to the diet restores gut microbiota balance, thereby lowering oxidative stress in the gut and brain. Conclusion: The proposed computational framework is novel in its applicability, as demonstrated by the determination of the whole-body distribution of ROS toxins and metabolic association in ASD. In addition, it emphasized the potential for developing novel therapeutic strategies to alleviate autism symptoms. Notably, the presented integrated model validates the importance of combining PBPK modeling with COBRA -specific tissue details for understanding disease pathogenesis.
35330464|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder without a known cure. Current standard-of-care treatments focus on addressing core symptoms directly but have provided limited benefits. In many cases, individuals with ASD have abnormalities in multiple organs, including the brain, immune and gastrointestinal system, and multiple physiological systems including redox and metabolic systems. Additionally, multiple aspects of the environment can adversely affect children with ASD including the sensory environment, psychosocial stress, dietary limitations and exposures to allergens and toxicants. Although it is not clear whether these medical abnormalities and environmental factors are related to the etiology of ASD, there is evidence that many of these factors can modulate ASD symptoms, making them a potential treatment target for improving core and associated ASD-related symptoms and improving functional limitation. Additionally, addressing underlying biological disturbances that drive pathophysiology has the potential to be disease modifying. This article describes a systematic approach using clinical history and biomarkers to personalize medical treatment for children with ASD. This approach is medically comprehensive, making it attractive for a multidisciplinary approach. By concentrating on treatable conditions in ASD, it is possible to improve functional ability and quality of life, thus providing optimal outcomes.
35330117|a|The human gut microbiome is associated with various diseases, including autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Variations of the taxonomical composition in the gut microbiome of children with ASD have been observed repeatedly. However, features and parameters of the microbiome CRISPR-Cas systems in ASD have not been investigated yet. Here, we demonstrate such an analysis in order to describe the overall changes in the microbiome CRISPR-Cas systems during ASD as well as to reveal their potential to be used in diagnostics and therapy. For the systems identification, we used a combination of the publicly available tools suited for completed genomes with subsequent filtrations. In the considered data, the microbiomes of children with ASD contained fewer arrays per Gb of assembly than the control group, but the arrays included more spacers on average. CRISPR arrays from the microbiomes of children with ASD differed from the control group neither in the fractions of spacers with protospacers from known genomes, nor in the sets of known bacteriophages providing protospacers. Almost all bacterial protospacers of the gut microbiome systems for both children with ASD and the healthy ones were located in prophage islands, leaving no room for the systems to participate in the interspecies competition.
35329994|a|BACKGROUND: Sensory reactivity is considered one of the diagnostic criteria for Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) and has been associated with poorer functional outcomes, behavioral difficulties, and autism severity across the lifespan. The characterization of the sensory processing in ASD has thus become crucial to identify the sensory and motor features influencing the development of personal autonomy. OBJECTIVES: The present study has two aims: (1) to compare the sensory processing between school-aged children with ASD and typically developing peers (TD); (2) to evaluate whether, within the ASD sample, the cognitive level and reported sensory symptoms explain the scores exhibited at the Sensory Processing Measure (SPM-2). METHODS: The SPM-2 test was administered to the parents of 105 children with ASD and 70 TD. The ASD group was further subdivided into two groups, namely high and low functioning based on their cognitive level (High Functioning (HF), IQ > 80; Low Functioning (LF), IQ < 80). RESULTS: ASD children exhibited higher scores throughout the SPM-2 total score and its multiple subscales. Within ASD, while HF and LF children did not differ in terms of the SPM-2 total score, a significant difference was found for the hearing, social participation, and balance and motion subscales. CONCLUSIONS: Aside from classical knowledge that the ASD population suffers from sensory processing disorders, we revealed that different sensory patterns are associated with high or low cognitive functioning. Beyond its neurobiological interest, such knowledge may be of fundamental importance for individualizing psychoeducational interventions in preschool- and school-aged children and later developmental stages.
35329408|a|(1) We examined the hypothesis that in utero/peripartum antiretroviral (IPA) exposure may affect the likelihood of developmental disorders-i.e., attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and functional impairment (FI). (2) Children and their primary caregivers were enrolled and followed for 12 months. The sample included 250 children perinatally HIV-infected (CPHIV), 250 children HIV-exposed and uninfected (CHEU) of women living with HIV, and 250 children HIV unexposed and uninfected (CHUU) at 6-18 years of age. CHEU's IPA exposure -type was established via medical records and categorized as no IPA, single-dose nevirapine with/without zidovudine (SdNVP +- AZT), SdNVP + AZT + Lamivudine (3TC), or combination ART (cART). Developmental disorders were assessed at months 0, 6, and 12 per caregiver response to standardized questions from the third edition of Behavioral Assessment System for Children. Multivariable repeated measures linear regression models estimated standardized mean differences (SMDs) with 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) according to the IPA exposure type relative to CHUU with adjustment for the dyad's sociodemographic and psychosocial factors. (3) Relative to the CHUU, outcomes were similar for CPHIV/CHEU with cART, SdNVP +- AZT, and no anti-retroviral drug exposure in the peripartum period. For CHEU relative to CHUU, SdNVP + AZT + 3TC exposure was associated with lower resiliency (SMD = -0.26, 95% CI: -0.49, -0.51), and elevated scores on ADHD (SMD = 0.41, 95% CI: 0.12, 0.70), ASD (SMD = 0.40, 95% CI: 0.19, 0.61), and EBD (SMD = 0.32, 95% CI: 0.08, 0.56) probability and functional impairment (SMD = 0.39, 95% CI: 0.18, 0.61) index scores. With the exception of ADHD, the adverse association between SdNVP + AZT + 3TC and outcomes were replicated for CPHIV vs. CHUU. (4) The results provided reassuring evidence that cART exposure in the peripartum period is unlikely to be adversely associated with developmental disorder probability scores in late childhood and adolescent years. However, the peripartum SdNVP + AZT + 3TC exposure associated elevation in developmental disorder probability and functional limitation at 6-18 years of life is a concern.
35329335|a|AIMS: The diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is not easy as there is no direct test that exists to establish such a diagnosis. Increasing community and healthcare professional knowledge of the ASD spectrum is crucial because it will encourage parents of ASD children to seek screening and diagnosis from a specialist, allowing for better early detection and treatment. This study explored the knowledge of the general population in Saudi Arabia regarding ASD and assessed variables associated with an accurate understanding of ASD. METHODS: A total of 769 participants were involved in this cross-sectional study, which was conducted in Saudi Arabia between November 2021 and February 2022 using an online survey tool to explore the knowledge of the general population in Saudi Arabia regarding typical child development and ASD. A binary logistic regression analysis was used to determine factors affecting participants' knowledge of autism. RESULTS: Overall, the study participants showed a weak level of knowledge about autism with a mean score of 5.9 (SD: 3.1), comprising 34.7% of the total maximum obtainable score. Participants with a middle income category of 5000-7500 SR are less likely to be knowledgeable about autism compared to others (OR: 0.60 (95% CI: 0.39-0.92)) (p-value = 0.020). CONCLUSION: The participants in our study showed limited knowledge about autism. Government funds should be made available to facilitate educational services for ASD children. More funding and resources should be allocated by the government to provide assistance for children with special needs, and changes in public facilities are required to meet the demands of ASD patients. Through an informed educational effort, various media platforms should assist in improving the community's understanding of ASD and their attitude toward ASD patients. Educational campaigns should focus on enhancing the public's knowledge about ASD treatment and etiology.
35329125|a|OBJECTIVES: To explore the knowledge of the general community in Saudi Arabia about autism spectrum disorder. METHOD: A cross-sectional study was conducted for the period between June and September 2021 in Saudi Arabia using an online questionnaire tool. The questionnaire tool was developed based on a literature review. The questionnaire tool consists of 34 items that assess knowledge about autism spectrum disorder in terms of its etiology, autistic patient features, autistic children's abilities and needs, and autistic adults' abilities and needs. The total score for each subscale was used to define the level of knowledge of it. Correct answers were given a score of one, and the total score for each subscale was used to describe the level of knowledge of it. Logistic regression was used to identify predictors of good knowledge about autism spectrum disorder (defined as a total score equal or above the mean score of the study participants). RESULTS: This study enlisted the participation of 500 people. The participants' overall understanding of autism spectrum disorder was moderate, with a mean score of 20.6 (SD: 5.6) out of 34, or 60.6%. The participants' knowledge levels ranged from 32.2% to 77.5%. The items about the abilities and needs of adolescents and young people with autism had the highest degree of knowledge (77.5%). The items about autism's causes had the lowest level of expertise (32.2%). When compared to others, females, those with a master's degree, and those working in the healthcare field had a higher likelihood of knowing more about the autism spectrum condition. (p <= 0.05). CONCLUSION: Knowledge about autism spectrum disorder in Saudi Arabia is moderate. Social media channels and healthcare centers should be used to conduct educational campaigns for parents. The goal of this educational campaign should be to improve parents' ability to recognize the causes of autism.
35328799|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complex neurodevelopmental disease. To date, more than 1000 genes have been shown to be associated with ASD, and only a few of these genes account for more than 1% of autism cases. Klf7 is an important transcription factor of cell proliferation and differentiation in the nervous system, but whether klf7 is involved in autism is unclear. METHODS: We first performed ChIP-seq analysis of klf7 in N2A cells, then performed behavioral tests and RNA-seq in klf7+/- mice, and finally restored mice with adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated overexpression of klf7 in klf7+/- mice. RESULTS: Klf7 targeted genes are enriched with ASD genes, and 631 ASD risk genes are also differentially expressed in klf7+/- mice which exhibited the core symptoms of ASD. When klf7 levels were increased in the central nervous system (CNS) in klf7+/- adult mice, deficits in social interaction, repetitive behavior and majority of dysregulated ASD genes were rescued in the adults, suggesting transcriptional regulation. Moreover, knockdown of klf7 in human brain organoids caused dysregulation of 517 ASD risk genes, 344 of which were shared with klf7+/- mice, including some high-confidence ASD genes. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings highlight a klf7 regulation of ASD genes and provide new insights into the pathogenesis of ASD and promising targets for further research on mechanisms and treatments.
35328505|a|The X-linked gene encoding aristaless-related homeobox (ARX) is a bi-functional transcription factor capable of activating or repressing gene transcription, whose mutations have been found in a wide spectrum of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs); these include cortical malformations, paediatric epilepsy, intellectual disability (ID) and autism. In addition to point mutations, duplications of the ARX locus have been detected in male patients with ID. These rearrangements include telencephalon ultraconserved enhancers, whose structural alterations can interfere with the control of ARX expression in the developing brain. Here, we review the structural features of 15 gain copy-number variants (CNVs) of the ARX locus found in patients presenting wide-ranging phenotypic variations including ID, speech delay, hypotonia and psychiatric abnormalities. We also report on a further novel Xp21.3 duplication detected in a male patient with moderate ID and carrying a fully duplicated copy of the ARX locus and the ultraconserved enhancers. As consequences of this rearrangement, the patient-derived lymphoblastoid cell line shows abnormal activity of the ARX-KDM5C-SYN1 regulatory axis. Moreover, the three-dimensional (3D) structure of the Arx locus, both in mouse embryonic stem cells and cortical neurons, provides new insight for the functional consequences of ARX duplications. Finally, by comparing the clinical features of the 16 CNVs affecting the ARX locus, we conclude that-depending on the involvement of tissue-specific enhancers-the ARX duplications are ID-associated risk CNVs with variable expressivity and penetrance.
35328471|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of complex multifactorial neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by a wide and variable set of neuropsychiatric symptoms, including deficits in social communication, narrow and restricted interests, and repetitive behavior. The immune hypothesis is considered to be a major factor contributing to autism pathogenesis, as well as a way to explain the differences of the clinical phenotypes and comorbidities influencing disease course and severity. Evidence highlights a link between immune dysfunction and behavioral traits in autism from several types of evidence found in both cerebrospinal fluid and peripheral blood and their utility to identify autistic subgroups with specific immunophenotypes; underlying behavioral symptoms are also shown. This review summarizes current insights into immune dysfunction in ASD, with particular reference to the impact of immunological factors related to the maternal influence of autism development; comorbidities influencing autism disease course and severity; and others factors with particular relevance, including obesity. Finally, we described main elements of similarities between immunopathology overlapping neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders, taking as examples autism and Parkinson Disease, respectively.
35328081|a|Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS) is a multi-systemic disorder characterized by both genetic and phenotypic variability. Genetic abnormalities causing PMS span from pathogenic variants of the SHANK3 gene to chromosomal rearrangements affecting the 22q13 region and leading to the loss of up to over nine megabases. The clinical presentation of individuals with PMS includes intellectual disability, neonatal hypotonia, delayed or absent speech, developmental delay, and minor dysmorphic facial features. Several other features may present with differences in age of onset and/or severity: seizures, autism, regression, sleep disorders, gastrointestinal problems, renal disorders, dysplastic toenails, and disrupted thermoregulation. Among the causes of this phenotypic variability, the size of the 22q13 deletion has effects that may be influenced by environmental factors interacting with haploinsufficiency or hemizygous variants of certain genes. Another mechanism linking environmental factors and phenotypic variability in PMS involves the loss of one copy of genes like BRD1 or CYP2D6, located at 22q13 and involved in the regulation of genomic methylation or pharmacokinetics, which are also influenced by external agents, such as diet and drugs. Overall, several non-mutually exclusive genetic and epigenetic mechanisms interact with environmental factors and may contribute to the clinical variability observed in individuals with PMS. Characterization of such factors will help to better manage this disorder.
35328058|a|Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS) is a rare, heterogeneous, and complex neurodevelopmental disorder. It is generally caused by a heterozygous microdeletion of contiguous genes located in the distal portion of the long arm of chromosome 22, including the SHANK3 gene. Sequence variants of SHANK3, including frameshift, nonsense mutations, small indels and splice site mutations also result in PMS. Furthermore, haploinsufficiency in SHANK3 has been suggested as the main cause of PMS. SHANK3 is also associated with intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder and schizophrenia. The phenotype of PMS is variable, and lacks a distinctive phenotypic characteristic, so the clinical diagnosis should be confirmed by genetic analysis. PMS is a multi-system disorder, and clinical care must encompass various specialties and therapists. The role of risperidone, intranasal insulin, insulin growth factor 1, and oxytocin as potential therapeutic options in PMS will be discussed in this review. The diagnosis of PMS is important to provide an appropriate clinical evaluation, treatment, and genetic counseling.
35328024|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) describes a complex and heterogenous group of neurodevelopmental disorders. Whole genome sequencing continues to shed light on the multifactorial etiology of ASD. Dysregulated transcriptional pathways have been implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders. Emerging evidence suggests that de novo POLR2A variants cause a newly described phenotype called 'Neurodevelopmental Disorder with Hypotonia and Variable Intellectual and Behavioral Abnormalities' (NEDHIB). The variable phenotype manifests with a spectrum of features; primarily early onset hypotonia and delay in developmental milestones. In this study, we investigate a patient with complex ASD involving epilepsy and strabismus. Whole genome sequencing of the proband-parent trio uncovered a novel de novo POLR2A variant (c.1367T>C, p. Val456Ala) in the proband. The variant appears deleterious according to in silico tools. We describe the phenotype in our patient, who is now 31 years old, draw connections between the previously reported phenotypes and further delineate this emerging neurodevelopmental phenotype. This study sheds new insights into this neurodevelopmental disorder, and more broadly, the genetic etiology of ASD.
35327806|a|There is marked variation internationally in the prevalence of children identified as having autism spectrum disorders (ASD). In part, this may reflect a shortage of screening tools for the early identification of children with ASD in many countries. This study aimed to evaluate the Kurdish translation of the Gilliam autism rating scale-third edition (GARS-3), a scale commonly used in Western countries that evaluates six domains related to the ASD definition from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) 5, notably Restricted/Repetitive Behavior, deficits in Social interaction and Social Communication, as well as differences in Cognitive Style, Maladaptive Speech, and Emotional Response. GARS-3 assessments were completed through interviews with parents of 735 children, 442 (53%) of whom were diagnosed with ASD. 165 (22%) with an intellectual disability, 49 (7%) with communication disorders, and 133 (18%) typically developing children. The reliability, construct, and the predictive validity of the scale was assessed, and the scores suggestive of a child having ASD were identified. The factor structure was broadly replicated, especially on items relating to social interaction and social communication. The cutoffs for the total scores that were indicative of possible ASD had a high degree of specificity and sensitivity in distinguishing children with ASD from typically developing peers. Some children with I.D. and communication disorders may also score above the threshold, and further assessments should be sought to confirm the presence of autistic traits. Although GARS-3 could be recommended for use in Kurdistan and possibly similar cultures, further prospective research is needed to confirm a diagnosis of assessment with children who score above and below the cutoff scores identified in this study. Moreover, the development of normative data drawn from Kurdish samples of children would be advantageous, although ambitious, given the lack of diagnostic services in many low- and middle-income countries.
35327780|a|Sensory Processing Disorders (SPDs) define dysfunctions in modulating, organising, and using information from several sensory channels for regulating motor, behavioural, emotional and attention responses. Although SPD can be identified also as an isolated condition in young children, its presence in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) population is really frequent. The study purpose is to explore the SPD clinical expression and the putative correlation with several behavioural aspects both in children with ASD and in those with isolated SPD. Therefore, 43 preschool-aged children (25 ASD vs. 18 SPD) were recruited, and their parents completed three questionnaires (Developmental Profile-3, Sensory Processing Measure-Preschool, Repetitive Behaviour Scale-Revised) to evaluate behavioural alterations and developmental levels. The main result is that both ASD and SPD groups had significantly sensory-related behavioural symptoms, although ASD children seem to be more impaired in all areas. Several significant correlations were found between sensory processing difficulties and repetitive behaviours, but in the SPD group a specific relationship between Body Awareness and Ritualistic/Sameness Behaviour was found. Conversely, in the ASD group, more diffuse interlinks between sensory processing difficulties and motor behaviours were significant. In conclusion, the present study confirms the key role of sensory-motor skills in early diagnosis and intervention among children at risk for neurodevelopmental disorders.
35327776|a|This article shows the progress achieved in a child who has received professional treatment combined with a family intervention at home. It discusses a 22-month-old patient identified as showing warning signs of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), a diagnosis that was subsequently confirmed through a standardized ADOS-2 test at 31 months of age. To establish the initial working objectives, a functional diagnosis was carried out at 23 months of age using the Battelle Developmental Inventory; a maturational delay was detected, situating the child at an age equivalent to 16 months. A professional intervention was designed in an early childhood care center, complemented by family intervention, so that the hours in which the child participated in learning experiences were increased. Notable advances were made in the areas of cognitive and motor skills, with more standard scores than when initially evaluated. Progress was also observed (though to a lesser extent) in other developmental areas such as language total, adaptive behavior, and self-help, while slight delays in the areas of socio-emotional development and reasoning and academic skills were found.
35327769|a|This systematic review evaluated psychomotor differences between children with and without siblings who have autism spectrum disorder (ASD), as well as the most reliable psychomotor skills that can help predict ASD and its associated language disorders. Literature from 2005 to 2020 was searched using the following databases: PubMed, Trip Medical Database, Cochrane, Web of Science, Science Direct, and Brain. A total 11 papers were included. Fine motor skills and joint attention displayed reliable results in order to predict ASD and its associated language disorders. The period between the first and the second year of life was considered the most appropriate one for the assessment of psychomotor skills. The best period to predict language disorders and ASD diagnosis is around 36 months old.
35327765|a|PURPOSE: The importance of dental care and oral hygiene is often underestimated in people with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Comorbidity with dental anxiety is greater in ASD subjects who also show unusual reactions to sensory stimuli. The aim of our study was to assess the efficacy for a sensory-adapted environment and targeted methods in reducing anxiety and positively influencing cooperation in children with ASD during a dental examination or specific treatments. MATERIAL AND METHODS: The sample consisted of 50 Italian children with a diagnosis of ASD (36 males and 14 females; aged 9-10 years) presenting with mild intellectual disability (ID) and verbal language skills. The subjects enrolled in the study had at least two decayed teeth and all were treated in two different dental environments: regular dental environment (RDE) and sensory-adapted dental environment (SADE). RESULTS: 20% of the sample was successfully treated in RDE, while 68% of subjects were successfully treated in SADE. CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that a sensory-adapted environment positively affects the therapeutic dental treatment in patients with ASD and reaffirm that sensory dysregulation in children with ASD is a crucial factor influencing the successful outcome of oral care.
35327725|a|Postural stability is dependent on the interpretation of external inputs acquired by sensory information processes, such as visual, vestibular, and proprioceptive systems, in order to accomplish neuromuscular control, balance maintenance, and appropriate motor response. A defect in any of these systems, or in the integration of information given by these systems, might threaten their capacity to maintain balance. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to investigate the sensory integration and balance using the Biodex balance system (BBS) in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) during the static posture. Seventy-four children from both sexes, 38 with ASD matched with 36 typically developed (TD) children as a control group, were included in the study. Using the Biodex balance system, the postural sway was evaluated through the modified Clinical Test of Sensory Integration and Balance (m-CTSIB) during quiet standing. In this test, four different situations were considered from standing position: eyes open/firm surface, eyes closed/firm surface, eyes open/foam surface, and eyes closed/foam surface. ASD children showed a significant increase in postural sway under all tested conditions when compared to the TD children group, especially for the conditions in which visual and somatosensory inputs were disrupted (p-value < 0.05). These results provide evidence that postural stability decreased in ASD children. Under static postural challenges, the current study's findings imply that children diagnosed with ASD have postural control deficiencies, especially for the conditions in which visual and somatosensory input was disrupted. Further research must be conducted to find the best balance training program for ASD cases using the Biodex balance system and considering its impact on motor skills.
35327449|a|The epilepsies are a broad group of conditions characterized by repeated seizures, and together are one of the most common neurological disorders. Additionally, epilepsy is comorbid with many neurological disorders, including lysosomal storage diseases, syndromic intellectual disability, and autism spectrum disorder. Despite the prevalence, treatments are still unsatisfactory: approximately 30% of epileptic patients do not adequately respond to existing therapeutics, which primarily target ion channels. Therefore, new therapeutic approaches are needed. Disturbed proteostasis is an emerging mechanism in epilepsy, with profound effects on neuronal health and function. Proteostasis, the dynamic balance of protein synthesis and degradation, can be directly disrupted by epilepsy-associated mutations in various components of the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS), or impairments can be secondary to seizure activity or misfolded proteins. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress can arise from failed proteostasis and result in neuronal death. In light of this, several treatment modalities that modify components of proteostasis have shown promise in the management of neurological disorders. These include chemical chaperones to assist proper folding of proteins, inhibitors of overly active protein degradation, and enhancers of endogenous proteolytic pathways, such as the UPS. This review summarizes recent work on the pathomechanisms of abnormal protein folding and degradation in epilepsy, as well as treatment developments targeting this area.
35327362|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with complex etiology. The core syndromes of ASD are deficits in social communication and self-restricted interests and repetitive behaviors. Social communication relies on the proper integration of sensory and motor functions, which is tightly interwoven with the limbic function of reward, motivation, and emotion in the brain. Monoamine neurotransmitters, including serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine, are key players in the modulation of neuronal activity. Owing to their broad distribution, the monoamine neurotransmitter systems are well suited to modulate social communication by coordinating sensory, motor, and limbic systems in different brain regions. The complex and diverse functions of monoamine neurotransmission thus render themselves as primary targets of pathophysiological investigation of the etiology of ASD. Clinical studies have reported that children with maternal exposure to valproic acid (VPA) have an increased risk of developing ASD. Extensive animal studies have confirmed that maternal treatments of VPA include ASD-like phenotypes, including impaired social communication and repetitive behavior. Here, given that ASD is a neurodevelopmental disorder, we begin with an overview of the neural development of monoaminergic systems with their neurochemical properties in the brain. We then review and discuss the evidence of human clinical and animal model studies of ASD with a focus on the VPA-induced pathophysiology of monoamine neurotransmitter systems. We also review the potential interactions of microbiota and monoamine neurotransmitter systems in ASD pathophysiology. Widespread and complex changes in monoamine neurotransmitters are detected in the brains of human patients with ASD and validated in animal models. ASD animal models are not only essential to the characterization of pathogenic mechanisms, but also provide a preclinical platform for developing therapeutic approaches to ASD.
35326346|a|BACKGROUND: Heterozygous pathogenic variants in the DDX3X gene account for 1-3% of females with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD). The clinical presentation is variable, including a wide range of neurological and behavioral deficits and structural defects of the brain. Approximately 52% of affected females remain nonverbal after five years of age. CASE PRESENTATION: We report a 7 year old nonverbal female with a likely novel de novo pathogenic heterozygous variant in the DDX3X gene affecting the non-canonical splice-site in the intron 1 (NM_001356:c.45+12G>A). The patient presents with features typical for the DDX3X phenotype, such as: movement disorders, behavioral problems, a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and some other features uncommon for DDX3X such as: muscle hypertonia and spinal asymmetry evaluated through the scoliometer. CONCLUSIONS: Due to its rare occurrence, the clinical picture of DDX3X syndrome is yet to be fully determined. So far, behavioral disorders, including those from ASD, and neurological abnormalities seem to be the dominant features of this disorder.
35326283|a|Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) struggle to access high-quality health care due to the shortage of trained providers. ECHO (Extension for Community Healthcare Outcomes) Autism is a unique educational program that allows ASD experts to provide knowledge and skills to professionals in local communities to deliver evidence-based care to children with ASD and their families. The model teaches clinicians how to screen and diagnose ASD, as well as manage common co-occurring medical and mental health issues. ECHO Autism is particularly useful for addressing the complex needs of children with ASD and reducing disparities often present in rural and underserved communities. The model can be disseminated globally due to its flexibility in accommodating local and regional differences in social norms and constructs. This article provides an overview of the format of the ECHO Autism model, data supporting the model's efficacy, and discusses future research directions.
35326270|a|Multiple lines of evidence suggest that a deficiency of Fragile X Mental Retardation Protein (FMRP) mediates dysfunction of the metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype 5 (mGluR5) in the pathogenesis of fragile X syndrome (FXS), the most commonly known single-gene cause of inherited intellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Nevertheless, animal and human studies regarding the link between FMRP and mGluR5 expression provide inconsistent or conflicting findings about the nature of those relationships. Since multiple clinical trials of glutamatergic agents in humans with FXS did not demonstrate the amelioration of the behavioral phenotype observed in animal models of FXS, we sought measure if mGluR5 expression is increased in men with FXS to form the basis for improved clinical trials. Unexpectedly marked reductions in mGluR5 expression were observed in cortical and subcortical regions in men with FXS. Reduced mGluR5 expression throughout the living brains of men with FXS provides a clue to examine FMRP and mGluR5 expression in FXS. In order to develop the findings of our previous study and to strengthen the objective tools for future clinical trials of glutamatergic agents in FXS, we sought to assess the possible value of measuring both FMRP levels and mGluR5 expression in men with FXS. We aimed to show the value of measurement of FMRP levels and mGluR5 expression for the diagnosis and treatment of individuals with FXS and related conditions. We administered 3-[18F]fluoro-5-(2-pyridinylethynyl)benzonitrile ([18F]FPEB), a specific mGluR5 radioligand for quantitative measurements of the density and the distribution of mGluR5s, to six men with the full mutation (FM) of FXS and to one man with allele size mosaicism for FXS (FXS-M). Utilizing the seven cortical and subcortical regions affected in neurodegenerative disorders as indicator variables, adjusted linear regression of mGluR5 expression and FMRP showed that mGluR5 expression was significantly reduced in the occipital cortex and the thalamus relative to baseline (anterior cingulate cortex) if FMRP levels are held constant (F(7,47) = 6.84, p < 0.001).These findings indicate the usefulness of cerebral mGluR5 expression measured by PET with [18F]FPEB and FMRP values in men with FXS and related conditions for assessments in community facilities within a hundred-mile radius of a production center with a cyclotron. These initial results of this pilot study advance our previous study regarding the measurement of mGluR5 expression by combining both FMRP levels and mGluR5 expression as tools for meaningful clinical trials of glutamatergic agents for men with FXS. We confirm the feasibility of this protocol as a valuable tool to measure FMRP levels and mGluR5 expression in clinical trials of individuals with FXS and related conditions and to provide the foundations to apply precision medicine to tailor treatment plans to the specific needs of individuals with FXS and related conditions.
35326100|a|Mitochondrial division inhibitor-1 (mdivi-1), a non-specific inhibitor of Drp1-dependent mitochondrial fission, is neuroprotective in numerous preclinical disease models. These include rodent models of Alzheimer's disease and ischemic or traumatic brain injury. Among its Drp1-independent actions, the compound was found to suppress mitochondrial Complex I-dependent respiration but with less resultant mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) emission compared with the classical Complex I inhibitor rotenone. We employed two different methods of quantifying Trolox-equivalent antioxidant capacity (TEAC) to test the prediction that mdivi-1 can directly scavenge free radicals. Mdivi-1 exhibited moderate antioxidant activity in the 2,2'-azinobis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline 6-sulfonate) (ABTS) assay. Half-maximal ABTS radical depletion was observed at ~25 muM mdivi-1, equivalent to that achieved by ~12.5 muM Trolox. Mdivi-1 also showed antioxidant activity in the alpha, alpha-diphenyl-beta-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) assay. However, mdivi-1 exhibited a reduced capacity to deplete the DPPH radical, which has a more sterically hindered radical site compared with ABTS, with 25 muM mdivi-1 displaying only 0.8 muM Trolox equivalency. Both assays indicate that mdivi-1 possesses biochemical antioxidant activity but with modest potency relative to the vitamin E analog Trolox. Future studies are needed to evaluate whether the ability of mdivi-1 to directly scavenge free radicals contributes to its mechanisms of neuroprotection.
35325727|a|OBJECTIVES: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a set of neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by a deficit in social behaviors and nonverbal interactions such as reduced eye contact and facial expression. Changes in growth factors expression including Insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) have been shown in ASD. This project aimed to study the association of IGF-1 (rs12579108) promoter polymorphism and its serum concentration with ASD. METHODS: DNA was extracted from blood samples of 200 ASD children and 198 healthy controls and genotyped by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) and IGF-1 serum concentration was measured by ELISA. RESULTS: The results showed that the prevalence of AA, CA, and CC genotypes were 2%, 61%, 37% in controls and 4%, 31%, and 65% in ASD patients, respectively (P = 0.0005). The prevalence of A and C alleles in the controls were 33% and 67% and in ASD patients were 19% and 81%, respectively (P = 0.001). We have also showed that serum IGF-1 concentration in ASD and control groups was 31.45 +- 9.84 and 54.62 +- 11.63 ng/ml, respectively (P = 0.001). Our results also showed that AA genotype is significantly related to decreased serum IGF-1 concentrations in ASD (CC, CA and AA serum levels were 50.22 +- 12.68, 33.55 +- 9.13 and 22.55 +- 7.26 and in controls were 77.88 +- 17.14, 54.77 +- 15.31 and 31.33 +- 9.91 ng/ml, respectively). CONCLUSION: It is concluded that there is a significant association between IGF-1 (rs12579108) promoter polymorphism and its serum concentration with ASD. We also suggest that AA genotype is linked to lower IGF-1 serum levels and may play as risk factor for ASD.
35325696|a|BACKGROUND: There is a paucity of research on interventions targeting preschool children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) for school readiness. OBJECTIVES: The objectives of this study are to develop and validate a school readiness module for making children with ASD ready for inclusive education and a scale to assess school readiness in them. METHODS: Based on literature review, principles of learning, and techniques of behavioral intervention, a module was developed and reviewed by independent experts regarding the utility of the contents. A scale to assess school readiness was also developed to measure the impact of administering the module on children with ASD which was also validated by the same set of experts. Lawshe's content validity ratio was used to assess the appropriateness of each item for inclusion in the module and scale. RESULTS: Experts (n = 6) gave their opinion on the usefulness of the School Readiness module for children with ASD. The experts agreed that most of the content under each component were valid with the exception of identification of objects by function, identification of environmental sounds and answering social questions. Similarly, in the school readiness scale there was good agreement for all items except for 1 item under domain 2 and 2 items under domain 5. CONCLUSION: A school readiness module and a scale to assess school readiness based on interventions provided as per the school readiness module were developed and validated. Further studies are needed to assess the utility of the module and scale in children with ASD.
35325671|a|OCD is characterized by obsessions (recurrent, intrusive, unwanted thoughts, images or impulses and compulsions (repetitive behaviors or mental acts that the individual feels compelled to perform), which can manifest together or separately (Fineberg et al., 2020). NICE guidelines suggest that low intensity psychological treatments (including ERP) is the first line treatment for OCD, and that a "stepped care" treatment approach for OCD reserves combination treatment for adults with OCD with severe functional impairment, and for adults without an adequate response to: 1) treatment with an SSRI alone (12 weeks duration) or 2) CBT (including ERP) alone (NICE, 2005). Existing US treatment guidelines (APA guidelines) suggest that there are three first-line treatments for OCD (SSRI, CBT, SSRI+CBT) and recommends combined treatment for patients with an unsatisfactory response to monotherapy or for patients with severe OCD. Although, systematic review and meta-analysis of studies published in 1993-2014 suggest that combination treatment was not significantly better than CBT plus placebo (Ost et al., 2015), based on data from a recent systematic and meta-analysis which searched the two controlled trials registers maintained by the Cochrane Collaboration Common Mental Disorders group, the combination treatment approach is likely to be more effective than psychotherapeutic interventions alone, at least in severe obsessive-compulsive disorder (Skapinakis et al., 2016a). Based on data from Optimal treatment for OCD study conducted by Fineberg et al., (2018) combined treatment appeared to be the most effective especially when compared to CBT monotherapy, but SSRI monotherapy was found as the most cost effective. In this review we summarize available treatment recommendations.
35325339|a|Autistic youth are at risk for internalizing mental health problems such as depression and anxiety. Similarly, parents of autistic youth report higher levels of depression than parents of typically developing children. The goal of this study was to examine bidirectional associations between parent depression symptoms and the internalizing problems of autistic youth in 188 families across four time points (T1-T4; spaced 12 months apart). A cross-lagged panel model revealed that mother (T1 and T2) and father (T1) depression symptoms positively predicted the youth's internalizing problems 12 months later. The youth's internalizing problems at T3 positively predicted maternal depression symptoms at T4. Future research should explore genetic and environmental pathways that link parent depression and internalizing problems in autistic youth.
35324879|a|Developmental delays, disorders, or disabilities (DDs) manifest in infancy and childhood and can limit a person's function throughout life* (1-3). To guide strategies to optimize health for U.S. children with DDs, CDC analyzed data from 44,299 participants in the 2014-2018 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). Parents reported on 10 DDs,  functional abilities, health needs, and use of services. Among the approximately one in six (17.3%) U.S. children and adolescents aged 3-17 years (hereafter children) with one or more DDs, 5.7% had limited ability to move or play, 4.7% needed help with personal care, 4.6% needed special equipment, and 2.4% received home health care, compared with <=1% for each of these measures among children without DDs. Children with DDs were two to seven times as likely as those without DDs to have taken prescription medication for >=3 months (41.6% versus 8.4%), seen a mental health professional (30.6% versus 4.5%), a medical specialist (26.0% versus 12.4%), or a special therapist, such as a physical, occupational, or speech therapist, (25.0% versus 4.5%) during the past year, and 18 times as likely to have received special education or early intervention services (EIS) (41.9% versus 2.4%). These percentages varied by type of disability and by sociodemographic subgroup. DDs are common, and children with DDs often need substantial health care and services. Policies and programs that promote early identification of children with developmental delays and facilitate increased access to intervention services can improve health and reduce the need for services later in life.  Sociodemographic inequities merit further investigation to guide public health action and ensure early and equitable access to needed care and services.
35324822|a|Diagnosis of pediatric intellectual disability (ID) can be difficult because it is due to a vast number of established and novel causes. Here, we described a full-term female infant affected by Kleefstra syndrome-2 presenting with neurodevelopmental disorder, a history of hypotonia and minor face anomalies. A systematic literature review was also performed. The patient was a 6-year-old Caucasian female. In the family history there was no intellectual disability or genetic conditions. Auxological parameters at birth were adequate for gestational age. Clinical evaluation at 6 months revealed hypotonia and, successively, delay in the acquisition of the stages of psychomotor development. Auditory, visual, somatosensory, and motor-evoked potentials were normal. A brain MRI, performed at 9 months, showed minimal gliotic changes in bilateral occipital periventricular white matter. Neuropsychiatric control, performed at 5 years, established a definitive diagnosis of childhood autism and developmental delay. Molecular analysis of the exome revealed a novel KMT2C missense variant: c.9244C > T (p.Pro3082Ser) at a heterozygous state, giving her a diagnosis of Kleefstra syndrome 2. Parents did not show the variant. Literature review (four retrieved eligible studies, 10 patients) showed that all individuals had mild, moderate, or severe ID; language and motor delay; and autism. Short stature, microcephaly, childhood hypotonia and plagiocephaly were also present. Conclusion. Kleefstra syndrome 2 is a difficult diagnosis of a rare condition with a high clinical phenotypic heterogeneity. This study suggests that it must be taken in account in the work-up of an orphan diagnosis of intellectual disability and/or autism spectrum disorder.
35324235|a|Despite extensive research examining self-management interventions for individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD),1 researchers have failed to evaluate self-management procedures for on-task behavior in the home environment or with parents as interventionists. Using an ABAB design, the present study examined the effectiveness of a parent-implemented intervention consisting of self-monitoring, self-evaluation, and contingent reinforcement to increase on-task behavior of three participants completing independent school work in their home. Traditional and masked visual analysis of single-case design data indicate that, across participants, the intervention increased on-task behavior, intervention effects were maintained at postintervention, parents implemented the intervention with high fidelity, parents and children rated procedures as high in social validity, and observations via live video technology resulted in high correspondence between parent and child ratings. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2022 APA, all rights reserved).
35324132|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is an umbrella term covering a range of conditions characterised by challenges with social interaction, restricted interests and repetitive behaviours. The prevalence of ASD has increased significantly in recent years, and there is a clinical impression of a preponderance of cases among young children whose mothers were not born in Norway. MATERIAL AND METHOD: The study included 142 children aged 2 to 6 years who were diagnosed with autism in the county of Sor-Trondelag, Norway in the period 2016-2019. The following information was collected: age at onset of symptoms and diagnosis, primary diagnosis, ADOS-2 (Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule) scores, whether the child was born in Norway and the mother's country of birth. RESULTS: Children of mothers born outside of Norway had a 7.7 times higher risk of being diagnosed with autism than children of Norwegian-born mothers, with an annual incidence of 0.74 % and 0.10 % respectively. These children were diagnosed earlier, at an average age (standard deviation) of 41.9 (11.8) and 51.8 (18.1) months respectively (95 % CI 4.7 to 15.2); a p-value of <0.001 for the difference. They also had a higher ADOS score, with an average (standard deviation) of 19.0 (6.2) and 15.3 (7.1) respectively. INTERPRETATION: The preponderance of autism diagnoses may be an indication that the mothers' country of origin has an impact on the development of the condition. This has implications for adaptions to the assessment and follow-up of this patient group.
35323990|a|The present study examines to what extent two core characteristics of the quality of life (QoL) construct were incorporated in the field of autism: (1) its subjective nature; and (2) its multidimensionality. Therefore, we reviewed 174 articles examining QoL in individuals with autism. The review showed parents reporting a lower QoL compared with autistic individuals themselves, especially on internal domains. This may suggest different expectations about what a good QoL may entail. Such an underestimation of QoL by others is commonly observed in individuals with disabilities (the so-called 'disability paradox'). For the multidimensionality of the QoL construct, our findings suggest that the narrower (and more unidimensional) construct of health-related QoL is often measured instead of QoL. Additionally, a substantial proportion of items did not measure QoL, but they evaluated characteristics that may or may not have an impact on QoL. Researchers and clinicians should be aware that QoL domains are selected and operationalized differently by different instruments. QoL may benefit from an exclusive focus on subjective aspects, which can be measured alongside more normative, objective characteristics of individuals or their environment.
35322417|a|There has been a marked increase in the prevalence of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in the last 25 years in North America. Some see this trend as positive and believe that it reflects a better identification of ADHD and even think that the disorder is still under-diagnosed. Others, however, contend that ADHD is over-diagnosed. To help mental health clinicians to maintain an informed and nuanced perspective on this debate, this critical review aims to (1) summarize empirical results on factors that might contribute to increase the number of ADHD diagnoses and (2) propose clinical recommendations coherent with these findings to improve clinical practices for ADHD assessment and treatment. We conclude that artifactual factors such as current formulation of diagnostic criteria, clinical practices, and inordinate focus on performance, which is rampant in North America, likely contribute to inflated prevalence rates.
35322406|a|AIM: To identify factors associated with quality of life (QoL) in children with intellectual disability. We aimed to identify patterns of association not observable in previous hypothesis-driven regression modelling using the same data set from a cross-sectional observational study. METHOD: A questionnaire was completed by 442 caregivers of children with confirmed intellectual disability and a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder, cerebral palsy, Down syndrome, or Rett syndrome. The Quality of Life Inventory-Disability (QI-Disability) questionnaire was used to assess child QoL. Independent variables described the child's health, functional abilities, community participation, and sociodemographics. The R package rpart was used to build the regression trees. RESULTS: The mean total QI-Disability score was 69.2 out of a maximum 100. The subgroup with the lowest QoL scores comprised children with a high degree of daytime sleepiness (n=74, mean 57.5) while the subgroup with the highest QoL scores (n=91, mean 80.3) comprised children with little daytime sleepiness who participated more frequently in community activities and displayed good eye contact while listening. INTERPRETATION: Regression tree analysis provides insights into the relative importance of associated factors. Sleep problems and community participation were more important than functional abilities in accounting for differences in QoL.
35322263|a|Genetic mosaicism is the result of the accumulation of somatic mutations in the human genome starting from the first postzygotic cell generation and continuing throughout the whole life of an individual. The rapid development of next-generation and single-cell sequencing technologies is now allowing the study of genetic mosaicism in normal tissues, revealing unprecedented insights into their clonal architecture and physiology. The somatic variant repertoire of an adult human neuron is the result of somatic mutations that accumulate in the brain by different mechanisms and at different rates during development and ageing. Non-pathogenic developmental mutations function as natural barcodes that once identified in deep bulk or single-cell sequencing can be used to retrospectively reconstruct human lineages. This approach has revealed novel insights into the clonal structure of the human brain, which is a mosaic of clones traceable to the early embryo that contribute differentially to the brain and distinct areas of the cortex. Some of the mutations happening during development, however, have a pathogenic effect and can contribute to some epileptic malformations of cortical development and autism spectrum disorder. In this Review, we discuss recent findings in the context of genetic mosaicism and their implications for brain development and disease.
35322201|a|
35322089|a|Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) may share genomic risks with certain mental disorders. This study aimed at investigating associations between parental RA and risks of mental disorders in offspring. Using the National Health Insurance Research Database (2001-2010), we conducted a matched cohort study involving two parent-child cohorts (i.e., RA-parent-child cohort and non-RA-parent-child cohort) between which risks of major mental disorders in offspring were compared. There were 23,981 parent-child pairs in the RA-parent-child cohort and 239,810 in the non-RA-parent-child cohort. Preliminary analysis demonstrated increased risks of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) [Odds ratio (OR) 1.47; 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.05-2.07], attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) [OR 1.34; (95% CI 1.17-1.54)], bipolar disorder [OR 1.41 (95% CI 1.17-1.70)], and major depressive disorder [OR 1.20 (95% CI 1.07-1.35)] associated with parental RA. Sub-group analysis further showed higher risks of the four disorders in children of mothers with RA but not those from fathers with RA. Higher risks of ASDs and ADHD were not noted in children of mothers with RA before childbirth. Maternal RA, but not paternal RA or mothers diagnosed with RA before childbirth, was associated with increased risks of multiple mental disorders in their offspring, suggesting potential contributions of maternal genetic factors to ASDs and ADHD development in offspring.
35321655|a|BACKGROUND: Computational phenotypes are most often combinations of patient billing codes that are highly predictive of disease using electronic health records (EHR). In the case of rare diseases that can only be diagnosed by genetic testing, computational phenotypes identify patient cohorts for genetic testing and possible diagnosis. This article details the validation of a computational phenotype for PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS) against the EHR of patients at three collaborating clinical research centers: Boston Children's Hospital, Children's National Hospital, and the University of Washington. METHODS: A combination of billing codes from the International Classification of Diseases versions 9 and 10 (ICD-9 and ICD-10) for diagnostic criteria postulated by a research team at Cleveland Clinic was used to identify patient cohorts for genetic testing from the clinical data warehouses at the three research centers. Subsequently, the EHR-including billing codes, clinical notes, and genetic reports-of these patients were reviewed by clinical experts to identify patients with PHTS. RESULTS: The PTEN genetic testing yield of the computational phenotype, the number of patients who needed to be genetically tested for incidence of pathogenic PTEN gene variants, ranged from 82 to 94% at the three centers. CONCLUSIONS: Computational phenotypes have the potential to enable the timely and accurate diagnosis of rare genetic diseases such as PHTS by identifying patient cohorts for genetic sequencing and testing.
35321368|a|Background: COVID-19 has become a global pandemic and has inevitably affected the whole world. This effect is greater on people with ASD (ASD) and their families. Depression, attempts to cope with change, and having difficulty interacting with others are some of the challenges people with ASD often face. The aim of this study was to review the psycho-social consequences of COVID-19 in people with ASD and their families. Methods: This study is a Literature Review. Extensive electronic search results for the keywords ASD, COVID-19, Coronavirus, psychological, psychosocial, and consequence in Google Scholar, PubMed, Scopus, ProQuest, Science Direct, SID and Magiran in 2020, eventually provided a total of 130 articles. After reviewing the titles of the articles, we excluded 85 articles as they were duplicated and/or irrelevant. Finally, based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria, 17 articles remained. Results: In general, the change in routine and uncertainty caused by COVID-19 have caused distress for people with ASD and will worsen their symptoms and mental health. Excessive stress worsens the mental health of caregivers, and as this burden increases, they report higher rates of social harm, depression, and anxiety that affect their daily functioning. Conclusion: The COVID-19 epidemic affects all strata of society. People with ASD are particularly vulnerable to the psychosocial effects of this epidemic. COVID-19 increases anxiety, distress, depression, financial problems, loss of a job, and even marital conflict. Access to necessary services and transmission problems are also the result of rapid social and environmental changes.
35321066|a|Background Risperidone and aripiprazole have been established as standard pharmacological treatments for irritability and associated aggressive behaviors in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and are the only drugs approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for those purposes. However, the rates of readmission with the use of these drugs in the pediatric population have not been studied, leaving a gap in the knowledge of antipsychotic effects. Readmission rates are a valuable metric of treatment efficacy that also reflect the financial burden, morbidity, and medical complications associated with multiple hospitalizations. Methodology A retrospective study was conducted in 65 Hospital Corporation of America Healthcare hospitals within the United States from 2016 to 2019. Patients aged 6-17 years with a diagnosis of ASD with irritability were included. The primary outcome was 30-, 60-, and 90-day readmission rates. Chi-square tests of independence and post-hoc analyses were used to assess the relatedness between readmission rate and antipsychotic use, as well as the type of antipsychotic medication if used. A binary regression analysis was used to analyze the relationship between demographic characteristics and readmission rate in this population. Patients on antidepressants, anxiolytics, or medications primarily used as mood stabilizers were excluded from the study to reduce confounding effects of such medications. Results A total of 2,375 patients aged 6-17 years were admitted for irritability and a diagnosis of ASD. In total 323 (13.8%) patients were readmitted from this group within 30 days of discharge. After controlling for age, sex, and gender, the use of antipsychotic medication was found to decrease 30- and 90-day readmission rates with an odds ratio of 1.2 to 1.4 times compared to no antipsychotic use (p < 0.04). In patients with autism not on antipsychotics, regression analysis revealed that older age (p = 0.0471) and White race (p = 0.0471) were associated with 30-day readmission (a = 0.05). For these patients, race was also significantly associated with 60-day (p = 0.0494) and 90-day (p = 0.0416) readmission rates. In patients with autism on either risperidone or aripiprazole, age (p = 0.0393) and race (p = 0.0316) were significantly associated with 30-day readmission rate. Conclusions Antipsychotic use reduced readmission rates within 30 days and 90 days in patients with irritability and ASD. Additionally, oral aripiprazole and oral risperidone were found to be equally effective in reducing the 30-day readmission rate, and neither was superior in comparison to the other in 30-, 60-, or 90-day readmission rates. The reduced 30- and 90-day readmission rates seen in our study with the use of antipsychotic medications emphasize the importance of antipsychotic use for individuals with ASD and irritability, even if the antipsychotic is not risperidone or aripiprazole. Groups who can particularly benefit from antipsychotic use include individuals who are refractory to first- and second-line therapies, such as behavioral interventions, or for those who present with persistent and serious risk of harm to themselves or others. Additionally, the use of antipsychotic medications in this scenario may reduce hospitalizations within 30 days of discharge, allowing reduction of the financial and emotional strain associated with these readmissions.
35321011|a|The volume and breadth of research on the role of the microbiome in neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders has expanded greatly over the last decade, opening doors to new models of mechanisms of the gut-brain axis and therapeutic interventions to reduce the burden of these outcomes. Studies have highlighted the window of birth to 3 years as an especially sensitive window when interventions may be the most effective. Harnessing the powerful gut-brain axis during this critical developmental window clarifies important investigations into the microbe-human connection and the developing brain, affording opportunities to prevent rather than treat neurodevelopmental disorders and neuropsychiatric illness. In this review, we present an overview of the developing intestinal microbiome in the critical window of birth to age 3; and its prospective relationship with neurodevelopment, with particular emphasis on immunological mechanisms. Next, the role of the microbiome in neurobehavioral outcomes (such as autism, anxiety, and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder) as well as cognitive development are described. In these sections, we highlight the importance of pairing mechanistic studies in murine models with large scale epidemiological studies that aim to clarify the typical health promoting microbiome in early life across varied populations in comparison to dysbiosis. The microbiome is an important focus in human studies because it is so readily alterable with simple interventions, and we briefly outline what is known about microbiome targeted interventions in neurodevelopmental outcomes. More novel examinations of known environmental chemicals that adversely impact neurodevelopmental outcomes and the potential role of the microbiome as a mediator or modifier are discussed. Finally, we look to the future and emphasize the need for additional research to identify populations that are sensitive to alterations in their gut microbiome and clarify how interventions might correct and optimize neurodevelopmental outcomes.
35320905|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of disabilities with impairments in physical, verbal, and behavior areas. Regardless the growing frequency of autism, no medicine has been formed for the management of the ASD primary symptoms. The most frequently prescribed drugs are off-label. Therefore, there is necessity for an advance tactic for the treatment of autism. The endocannabinoid system has a central role in ruling emotion and social behaviors. Dysfunctions of the system donate to the behavioral deficits in autism. Therefore, the endocannabinoid system represents a potential target for the development of a novel autism therapy. Cannabis and associated compounds have produced substantial research attention as a capable therapy in neurobehavioral and neurological syndromes. In this review we examine the potential benefits of medical cannabis and related compounds in the treatment of ASD and concurrent disorders.
35320442|a|Timely data on service use and needs across the lifespan are essential to developing an effective and efficient service delivery system that is responsive to developmental issues. This study uses data from one of the largest statewide surveys conducted between 2017 and 2018 to compare service use and unmet needs among individuals on the autism spectrum across the lifespan. A statewide sample of 5792 caregivers of autistic children and adults were included in the study. Logistic regressions were conducted to compare service use and need among six age groups ranging from early childhood (0-5 years) to later adulthood (31+) while adjusting for sociodemographic characteristics. We found that the transition-age adult group (18-21 years) was less likely to receive services, including speech/language therapy, occupational therapy, one-on-one support, and social skill training, than adolescents. However, case management and mental health services increased with age. Young adults (22-30 years) were more likely to report unmet needs than both adolescents and transition-age adult groups. The use of services overall decrease and service needs increased compared to results from an earlier statewide survey that was conducting in 2009-2010. These results can be used to inform developmentally appropriate autism-related healthcare policies and service development and delivery. This study offers a more detailed look at differences between adult age subgroups that are novel. Further research is needed about the prevalence of ASD in adulthood, clinical trajectories, and outcomes in order to support autistic adults in getting the appropriate services and supports.
35320433|a|This study investigated how ownership identification accuracy and object preferences in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are influenced by visual distinctiveness and relative desirability. Unlike typically developing (TD) children matched on receptive language (M age equivalents: 58.8-59.9 months), children with ASD had difficulty identifying another person's property when object discriminability was low and identifying their own relatively undesirable objects. Children with ASD identified novel objects designated to them with no greater accuracy than objects designated to others, and associating objects with the self did not bias their preferences. We propose that, due to differences in development of the psychological self, ownership does not increase the attentional or preferential salience of objects for children with ASD.
35320432|a|
35320253|a|Augmentative and Alternative Communication is an aided or unaided means of communication which supports existing communication abilities of an individual or replaces natural speech due to any speech and language disorder. The deficit could be developmental or acquired such as autism spectrum disorder, cerebral palsy, learning difficulties, dysarthria, dyspraxia or due to any acquired neurological condition such as aphasia and other degenerative disorders. Furthermore, it may be due to surgical procedures such as laryngectomy. Alternate means of communication have also been successfully used with COVID-19 patients. These tools may include pictures, symbols, signs or voice output devices. Parents of children with special needs and medical professionals have been reluctant in implementing the approach due to certain misconceptions. The aim of this review is to summarize the current evidence for the use of Augmentative and Alternative Communication with a range of disorders in relation to in relation to Pakistan.
35320039|a|SignificanceThere are five KCNQ channels (KCNQ1-KCNQ5) and they are thought to either homomerize or heteromerize to form tetrameric channels. KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 are highly expressed in the brain and in particular the forebrain, the presumed site of action for many brain disorders. For the last 30 years, the prevailing view is that KCNQ potassium channels in the brain consist of KCNQ2/3 and possibly KCNQ3/5 heteromers. Here, using epitope-tagged knockin mice and split-intein-mediated protein trans-splicing experiments, we demonstrate that KCNQ2 channels form heteromers not only with KCNQ3 but also with KCNQ5 channels. Thus, our findings of unexpected KCNQ subunit composition will shift both our understanding of KCNQ genotype/phenotype relationships as well as drug screening strategies.
35319728|a|
35319424|a|Consciousness directs the actions of the agent for its own purposive gains. It re-organises a stimulus-response linear causality to deliver generative, creative agent action that evaluates the subsequent experience prospectively. This inversion of causality affords special properties of control that are not accounted for in integrated information theory (IIT), which is predicated on a linear, deterministic cause-effect model. IIT remains an incomplete, abstract, and disembodied theory without explanation of the psychobiology of consciousness that serves the vital agency the organism.
35318862|a|LAY ABSTRACT: A sense of being connected to other autistic people has been reported anecdotally. Friendships and connectedness may be important to autistic people and beneficial for their wellbeing. Our research aimed to understand the autistic community by interviewing 20 autistic people about their experiences of being connected to other autistic people. Participants were interviewed in person, over video, using a text-based software to type or over email. Participants detailed three parts of autistic community connectedness: a sense of belonging, social connection with autistic friends and political connectedness. The friendships autistic people had with one another were deemed to be very important to participants because it gave them confidence, provided companionship and made them happy. Some participants did not experience connectedness to the autistic community. These participants also found autism to be less important to their identity and had fewer positive feelings about being autistic. This research is important as it raises awareness that community connectedness is viewed as important to this group. It is possible that community connectedness may help protect the mental health of autistic people when they face stigma or negative life experiences in society.
35318709|a|AIM: This study investigated childhood diagnoses in children born extremely preterm before 24 weeks of gestation. METHODS: Diagnoses of neurodevelopmental disorders and selected somatic diagnoses were retrospectively retrieved from national Swedish registries for children born before 24 weeks from 2007 to 2018. Their individual medical files were also examined. RESULTS: We studied 383 children born at a median of 23.3 (range 21.9-23.9) weeks, with a median birthweight of 565 (range 340-874) grams. Three-quarters (75%) had neurodevelopmental disorders, including speech disorders (52%), intellectual disabilities (40%), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (30%), autism spectrum disorders (24%), visual impairment (22%), cerebral palsy (17%), epilepsy (10%) and hearing impairment (5%). More boys than girls born at 23 weeks had intellectual disabilities (45% vs. 27%, p < 0.01) and visual impairment (25% vs. 14%, p < 0.01). Just over half of the cohort (55%) received habilitation care. The majority (88%) had somatic diagnoses, including asthma (63%) and failure to thrive/short stature (39%). CONCLUSION: Most children born before 24 weeks had neurodevelopmental disorders and/or additional somatic diagnoses in childhood and were referred to habilitation services. Clinicians should be aware of the multiple health and developmental problems affecting these children. Resources are needed to identify their long-term support needs at an early stage.
35318663|a|Listener behavior has been shown to influence speaker behavior. However, little is known about the extent to which listener behavior can influence countertherapeutic outcomes. This study evaluated the influence of listener interest on the topics presented by adult participants conversing with an experimenter acting as an individual who exhibited restricted interests. Each session consisted of a 5-min conversation, during which the participant was instructed to talk about 3 topics. We compared the duration of topic presentation across phases in which the experimenter behaved as an interested listener for 1 topic or for all 3 topics. Results showed that topic presentation was controlled by listener interest and all participants reported that the simulation was believable, acceptable, and useful. Although preliminary, these findings have implications for understanding possible undesirable interactions between individuals diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder who exhibit restricted interests and their peers or caregivers.
35318658|a|Resurgence and renewal are treatment-relapse phenomena in which previously extinguished behavior returns after the conditions for an alternative response worsen or the context changes, respectively. Recently, researchers have evaluated the prevalence of resurgence and renewal when treating destructive behavior with functional communication training. However, resurgence of inappropriate mealtime behavior has yet to be evaluated; perhaps because treatments involve qualitatively different resurgence opportunities (e.g., increased bite-presentation rate). We evaluated the prevalence of resurgence and renewal of inappropriate mealtime behavior across 22 and 25 applications of extinction-based treatments, respectively. Resurgence occurred in 41% (9/22) of applications, most often following presentation-rate increases. Renewal occurred in 52% (13/25) of applications, most often following feeder changes from therapist to caregiver. We discuss these findings in terms of their ability to inform relapse-mitigation strategies for resurgence and renewal of inappropriate mealtime behavior.
35318645|a|BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) play a critical role in synaptic plasticity, and mutations in human genes encoding NMDAR subunits have been described in individuals with various neuropsychiatric disorders. Compounds with a positive allosteric effect are thought to compensate for reduced receptor function. EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: We use whole-cell patch-clamp electrophysiology on recombinant rat NMDARs and human variants found in individuals with various neuropsychiatric disorders, in combination with in silico modelling, to explore the site of action of novel epipregnanolone-based NMDAR modulators. KEY RESULTS: Analysis of the action of 4-(20-oxo-5beta-pregnan-3beta-yl) butanoic acid (EPA-But) at the NMDAR indicates that the effect of this steroid with a "bent" structure is different from that of cholesterol and oxysterols and shares a disuse-dependent mechanism of NMDAR potentiation with a "planar" steroid 20-oxo-pregn-5-en-3beta-yl sulfate (PE-S). The potentiating effects of EPA-But and PE-S are additive. Alanine scan mutagenesis identified residues that reduce the potentiating effect of EPA-But. No correlation was found between the effects of EPA-But and PE-S at mutated receptors that were less sensitive to either steroid. The relative degree of potentiation induced by the two steroids also differed in human NMDARs carrying rare variants of hGluN1 or hGluN2B subunits found in individuals with various neuropsychiatric disorders, including intellectual disability, epilepsy, developmental delay, and autism spectrum disorder.
35318642|a|AIM: This study evaluated the performance of children with learning problems in Taiwan by using the Taiwan Data Bank of Persons with Disability. METHOD: We included 3854 children (2343 males, 1511 females; mean [SD] age 9y 11mo [2y 4mo]) with specific learning disorder (SLD), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism, epilepsy, or intellectual disabilities for analysis. We used the Functioning Scale of the Disability Evaluation System-Child version to investigate performance at follow-up for at least 3 years. RESULTS: These participants demonstrated improvement across all the domains of the International Classification of Functioning, Health, and Disability including for mobility, learning, social participation, and daily living. The children with SLD (p=0.3) and epilepsy (p=0.442) did not demonstrate significant improvement in learning, whereas those with ADHD (p<0.001), autism (p<0.001), and intellectual disabilities (p<0.001) did. The children with epilepsy displayed the most impairment and least improvement. INTERPRETATION: This cross-diagnostic study of learning problems indicated the children with autism or ADHD received more structural education. However, education strategies for those with SLD or epilepsy required improvement. Finally, SLD is possibly underdiagnosed in children, and children with epilepsy are affected in multiple aspects.
35318541|a|It has been suggested that autistic traits are associated with less frequent alcohol use in adolescence. Our study seeks to examine the relationship between autistic traits and alcohol use in a large adolescent population. Leveraging data from the IMAGEN cohort, including 2045 14-year-old adolescents that were followed-up to age 18, we selected items on social preference/skills and rigidity from different questionnaires. We used linear regression models to (1) test the effect of the sum scores on the prevalence of alcohol use (AUDIT-C) over time, (2) explore the relationship between autistic traits and alcohol use patterns, and (3) explore the specific effect of each autistic trait on alcohol use. Higher scores on the selected items were associated with trajectories of less alcohol use from the ages between 14 and 18 (b = - 0.030; CI 95% = - 0.042, - 0.017; p < 0.001). Among adolescents who used alcohol, those who reported more autistic traits were also drinking less per occasion than their peers and were less likely to engage in binge drinking. We found significant associations between alcohol use and social preference (p < 0.001), nervousness for new situations (p = 0.001), and detail orientation (p < 0.001). Autistic traits (social impairment, detail orientation, and anxiety) may buffer against alcohol use in adolescence.
35317674|a|The broad autism phenotype commonly refers to sub-clinical levels of autistic-like behaviour and cognition presented in biological relatives of autistic people. In a recent study, we reported findings suggesting that the broad autism phenotype may also be expressed in facial morphology, specifically increased facial masculinity. Increased facial masculinity has been reported among autistic children, as well as their non-autistic siblings. The present study builds on our previous findings by investigating the presence of increased facial masculinity among non-autistic parents of autistic children. Using a previously established method, a 'facial masculinity score' and several facial distances were calculated for each three-dimensional facial image of 192 parents of autistic children (58 males, 134 females) and 163 age-matched parents of non-autistic children (50 males, 113 females). While controlling for facial area and age, significantly higher masculinity scores and larger (more masculine) facial distances were observed in parents of autistic children relative to the comparison group, with effect sizes ranging from small to medium (0.16 <= d <= .41), regardless of sex. These findings add to an accumulating evidence base that the broad autism phenotype is expressed in physical characteristics and suggest that both maternal and paternal pathways are implicated in masculinized facial morphology.
35317657|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Autistic people contend with high levels of stigma in a wide array of cultures worldwide. There is a scarcity of literature on stigma in relation to autism in faith communities, with some limited research on this issue in Christian, Muslim and Hindu populations. There is virtually no research focussing on this topic in Jewish communities and to our knowledge, none at all within UK Jewish contexts. In this study, we aimed to explore experiences of stigma towards autism and sought views on what steps have and can be taken to reduce such stigma. Using an interpretative phenomenological analysis approach, we conducted semi-structured interviews with 10 participants within the UK Jewish community, including parents, rabbis, SENDCos, teachers, and headmasters of autistic children in both mainstream and specialist autistic schools. Interviews were conducted over 2 months in 2020. During analysis, 5 superordinate (central) themes and 13 subordinate themes were abstracted from the data. Superordinate themes included 'Stigma not specific to the Jewish community'; 'Considerable strides made'; 'More a lack of knowledge or denial than stigma'; 'Fear of stigma is a real concern but not widely prevalent'; and 'Potent factors that reduce stigma in the Jewish community'. We recommend workshops for greater awareness and training for teachers and parents on autism and autistic children's experiences. We also recommend the formation of specialist autism schools in other communities and promotion of positive narratives concerning autistic people, as this successfully reduced stigma within the Jewish community.
35317640|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Unique perceptual skills and abnormalities in perception have been extensively demonstrated in those with autism for many perceptual domains, accounting, at least in part, for some of the main symptoms. Several new hypotheses suggest that perceptual representations in autism are unrefined, appear less constrained by exposure and regularities of the environment, and rely more on actual concrete input. Consistent with these emerging views, a bottom-up, data-driven fashion of processing has been suggested to account for the atypical perception in autism. It is yet unclear, however, whether reduced effects of prior knowledge and top-down information, or rather reduced noise in the sensory input, account for the often-reported bottom-up mode of processing in autism. We show that neither is sufficiently supported. Instead, we demonstrate clear differences between autistics and neurotypicals in how incoming input is weighted against prior knowledge and experience in determining the final percept. Importantly, the findings tap central differences in perception between those with and without autism that are consistent across identified sub-clusters within each group.
35317508|a|Introduction: Temperament differences were shown in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD); however, associations of temperament with ASD severity and accompanying psychiatric symptoms have yet to be studied. Methods: We evaluated 58 ASD-diagnosed children's temperaments through disorder severity and psychiatric symptoms and compared them with 58 typically developed children. We utilized the Children's Behavior Questionnaire-Short Form, The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ). The Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) was used to evaluate psychiatric symptoms and ASD severity levels of children. Results: Negative affect, effortful control, and perceptual sensitivity were found lower in ASD-diagnosed children and decreased with ASD severity. Effortful control was also found negatively correlated with scores of behavioral problems, hyperactivity, and total difficulties. Besides, anger/frustration was found predictive for conduct and peer problems, and total difficulty scores. Conclusion: Further studies are needed to verify and expand these pioneer findings.
35317342|a|Social functioning is a key domain of impairment in both autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). This review adopts the social information-processing model as the theoretical framework to compare and contrast the deficits of ASD and ADHD at each of the six steps of social information-processing. Both disorders show deficits at each step, but the nature and origins of the deficits are different. Thus, while both disorders exhibit a common outcome of social impairment, the exact pathways that each disorder traverses along the six steps of social information-processing are different. For ASD, there is a social knowledge/behaviour deficit arising from difficulties in social/emotional cue detection, encoding, and interpretation, leading to problems in joining and initiating social interaction. For ADHD, there is a performance deficit incurred by disruption arising from the ADHD symptoms of inattention and hyperactivity/impulsivity, while its acquisition capacity on social knowledge is relatively intact. The inattentive, intrusive, and impulsive behaviours of ADHD unsettle social interaction. Finally, this review proposes training targets for intervention along the six steps of the social information-processing model for ASD and ADHD, as well as areas for future research in further elucidating the social impairment of the two disorders.
35317228|a|For a long time, the central nervous system was believed to be the only regulator of cognitive functions. However, accumulating evidence suggests that the composition of the microbiome is strongly associated with brain functions and diseases. Indeed, the gut microbiome is involved in neuropsychiatric diseases (e.g., depression, autism spectrum disorder, and anxiety) and neurodegenerative diseases (e.g., Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease). In this review, we provide an overview of the link between the gut microbiome and neuropsychiatric or neurodegenerative disorders. We also introduce analytical methods used to assess the connection between the gut microbiome and the brain. The limitations of the methods used at present are also discussed. The accurate translation of the microbiome information to brain disorder could promote better understanding of neuronal diseases and aid in finding alternative and novel therapies.
35316513|a|N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) is a compound of increasing interest in the treatment of psychiatric disorders. Primarily through its antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and glutamate modulation activity, NAC has been investigated in the treatment of neurodevelopmental disorders, schizophrenia spectrum disorders, bipolar-related disorders, depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, obsessive compulsive-related disorders, substance-use disorders, neurocognitive disorders, and chronic pain. Whilst there is ample preclinical evidence and theoretical justification for the use of NAC in the treatment of multiple psychiatric disorders, clinical trials in most disorders have yielded mixed results. However, most studies have been underpowered and perhaps too brief, with some evidence of benefit only after months of treatment with NAC. Currently NAC has the most evidence of having a beneficial effect as an adjuvant agent in the negative symptoms of schizophrenia, severe autism, depression, and obsessive compulsive and related disorders. Future research with well-powered studies that are of sufficient length will be critical to better understand the utility of NAC in the treatment of psychiatric disorders.
35316294|a|INTRODUCTION: Mental, neurological and substance use conditions lead to tremendous suffering, yet globally access to effective care is limited. In line with the 13th General Programme of Work (GPW 13), in 2019 the World Health Organization (WHO) launched the WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health: Universal Health Coverage for Mental Health to advance mental health policies, advocacy, and human rights and to scale up access to quality and affordable care for people living with mental health conditions. Six countries were selected as 'early-adopter' countries for the WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health in the initial phase. Our objective was to rapidly and comprehensively assess the strength of mental health systems in each country with the goal of informing national priority-setting at the outset of the Initiative. METHODS: We used a modified version of the Program for Improving Mental Health Care (PRIME) situational analysis tool. We used a participatory process to document national demographic and population health characteristics; environmental, sociopolitical, and health-related threats; the status of mental health policies and plans; the prevalence of mental disorders and treatment coverage; and the availability of resources for mental health. RESULTS: Each country had distinct needs, though several common themes emerged. Most were dealing with crises with serious implications for population mental health. None had sufficient mental health services to meet their needs. All aimed to decentralize and deinstitutionalize mental health services, to integrate mental health care into primary health care, and to devote more financial and human resources to mental health systems. All cited insufficient and inequitably distributed specialist human resources for mental health as a major impediment. CONCLUSIONS: This rapid assessment facilitated priority-setting for mental health system strengthening by national stakeholders. Next steps include convening design workshops in each country and initiating monitoring and evaluation procedures.
35316079|a|PURPOSE: Numerous studies have identified individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) with deficits in unichannel emotion perception and multisensory integration. However, only limited research is available on multichannel emotion perception in ASD. The purpose of this review was to seek conceptual clarification, identify knowledge gaps, and suggest directions for future research. METHOD: We conducted a scoping review of the literature published between 1989 and 2021, following the 2005 framework of Arksey and O'Malley. Data relating to study characteristics, task characteristics, participant information, and key findings on multichannel processing of emotion in ASD were extracted for the review. RESULTS: Discrepancies were identified regarding multichannel emotion perception deficits, which are related to participant age, developmental level, and task demand. Findings are largely consistent regarding the facilitation and compensation of congruent multichannel emotional cues and the interference and disruption of incongruent signals. Unlike controls, ASD individuals demonstrate an overreliance on semantics rather than prosody to decode multichannel emotion. CONCLUSIONS: The existing literature on multichannel emotion perception in ASD is limited, dispersed, and disassociated, focusing on a variety of topics with a wide range of methodologies. Further research is necessary to quantitatively examine the impact of methodological choice on performance outcomes. An integrated framework of emotion, language, and cognition is needed to examine the mutual influences between emotion and language as well as the cross-linguistic and cross-cultural differences. SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL: https://doi.org/10.23641/asha.19386176.
35315935|a|
35315325|a|OBJECTIVES: To determine whether children aged 4-7 years with a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) were at increased risk of fever, febrile seizures, or emergency department (ED) visits following measles- or pertussis-containing vaccines compared with children without ASD. METHODS: The study included children born between 1995-2012, aged 4-7 years at vaccination, and members of six healthcare delivery systems within Vaccine Safety Datalink. We conducted self-controlled risk interval analyses comparing rates of outcomes in risk and control intervals within each group defined by ASD status, and then compared outcome rates between children with and without ASD, in risk and control intervals, by estimating difference-in-differences using logistic regressions. RESULTS: The study included 14,947 children with ASD and 1,650,041 children without ASD. After measles- or pertussis-containing vaccination, there were no differences in association between children with and without ASD for fever (ratio of rate ratio for measles-containing vaccine = 1.07, 95% CI 0.58-1.96; for pertussis-containing vaccine = 1.16, 95% CI 0.63-2.15) or ED visits (ratio of rate ratio for measles-containing vaccine = 1.11, 95% CI 0.80-1.54; for pertussis-containing vaccine = 0.87, 95% CI 0.59-1.28). Febrile seizures were rare. Pertussis-containing vaccines were associated with small increased risk of febrile seizures in children without ASD. CONCLUSION: Children with ASD were not at increased risk for fever or ED visits compared with children without ASD following measles- or pertussis-containing vaccines. These results may provide further reassurance that these vaccines are safe for all children, including those with ASD.
35315131|a|BACKGROUND: The United States Food and Drug Administration has approved drugs that address only autism-related symptoms rather than the underlying impairments. N-Methyl-D-Aspartate  receptor antagonists have recently emerged as a promising treatment option for a variety of neurologic and developmental problems, including autism. AIMS: To review (systematically), for the first time, the medical literature that explores the safety in and efficacy of memantine in autism. METHODS AND PROCEDURES: A comprehensive electronic search for relevant randomized controlled trials was conducted in four databases. Using RevMan software, we extracted and pooled data as a risk ratio (RR) or normalized mean differences in an inverse variance strategy. RESULTS: This systematic review and meta-analysis includes five trials. There was no difference in enhancing social responsiveness when compared to placebo, though memantine lowered the likelihood of anxiety (RR = 0.25; 95% Confidence interval: [0.07; 0.87], p = 0.03). However, memantine aggravated impulsive behaviors. Additionally, in another trial that compared memantine added to risperidone versus risperidone added to placebo, memantine was found to be effective and safe. CONCLUSION: Memantine showed safety in reducing acute symptoms of anxiety and other symptoms encountered in pediatric patients with autism spectrum disorders. However, memantine does not improve the core symptoms of autism. Nevertheless, further long-term trials are needed to explore its potential efficacy.
35315042|a|OBJECTIVE: To explore the genetic basis for a child featuring idiopathic epilepsy and autism. METHODS: Peripheral blood samples of the child and his parents were collected with informed consent for the extraction of genome DNA. Whole exome sequencing was carried out for the family trio. Candidate variants were verified by Sanger sequencing and bioinformatic analysis. RESULTS: The proband was found to harbor a heterozygous nonsense c.3025C>T (p.Arg1009Ter) variant in exon 7 of the CASR gene exon 7, which may produce a truncated protein. Based on the guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics, the variant was predicted to be deleterious and classified as possibly pathogenic (PVS1+PM2). CONCLUSION: The c.3025C>T (p.Arg1009Ter) variant of the CASR gene probably underlay the disease in this child.
35315039|a|OBJECTIVE: To carry out genetic testing for a patient with 45,X/46,XY mosaicism and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). METHODS: Peripheral blood samples of the patient and his parents were collected for the extraction of genomic DNA. Trio-based whole exome sequencing and Sanger sequencing were carried out thereafter. RESULTS: The proband and his father were found to harbor a heterozygous c.4781G>A (p.Arg1594Gln) variant of the CACNA1I gene. In addition, the proband was also found to harbor a de novo c.268C>T (p.Arg90Trp) missense variant of the MTRR gene. Based on guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG), the c.4781G>A (p.Arg1594Gln) variant of the CACNA1I gene was predicted to be pathogenic (PVS1, PM1, PM2, PP3), while the c.268C>T (p.Arg90Trp) variant of the MTRR gene was predicted to be of uncertain significance. CONCLUSION: Variants of the CACNA1I and MTRR genes, together with the chromosomal mosaicism, may have predisposed to the susceptibility to the ASD in this patient.
35314657|a|Managing medical procedures for children with problematic disorders is a challenging approach, especially in the case of blood withdrawal for autism spectrum disorder-affected children. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) represent an important cellular model to study immune responses and drug toxicity. The monocytic cells, a fraction of PBMC, are strongly involved in some pathophysiological processes, such as inflammation and immune system changes. Here, we propose a simple, reliable protocol for obtaining peripheral blood-derived mononuclear cells from small volumes of blood samples.
35314581|a|Given an increasing number of children with ASD, the need for inclusive education has rapidly increased in China. Since 2011, children with ASD have been eligible for inclusive education. However, little is known of the implementation process by key personnel. The purpose of the current study was to qualitatively explore elementary school teachers' experiences and perspectives on an inclusive education policy and practice for students with ASD. Participants were from 5 elementary schools in 2 districts in Shanghai. This study consisted of data collection in 2 phases. First, semi-structured, in-depth interviews were conducted with school psychologists and vice principals responsible for students' mental health for implementation of general inclusive education at each school. Second, focus groups of frontline teachers were assembled to hear their firsthand experiences. A thematic analysis was performed. Findings indicated that although all 5 schools had some ASD-related support, training and resources varied depending on whether learning in regular classrooms (LRC) was implemented. Frontline teachers in particular faced challenges implementing LRC, including the limited extent of LRC, tedious implementation procedures, and parents' misconceptions of LRC. Regardless of these challenges, frontline teachers tried to support students with ASD as much as they could. The current findings should help to advance the inclusive education policy in Shanghai, including increasing the availability of inclusive education resources and training for teachers, issuing specific LRC guidance, and reducing ASD-related stigma. This study is among the first to explore the implementation of inclusive education in urban China.
35313974|a|BACKGROUND: While there are known risk factors for suicidality in autistic adults, these are often unconnected from theoretical frameworks that might explain why risk is elevated and guide clinical interventions. The present study investigated the relevance of constructs from the Interpersonal Theory of Suicide (ITS), including perceived burdensomeness, thwarted belongingness and acquired capability for suicide, and explored mechanisms through which certain risk factors (relationship status, age at diagnosis) might elevate suicide risk. METHODS: Autistic adults (n = 314) completed an online study including measures of depression, anxiety and constructs from the ITS. Linear and multinomial regression analysis disentangled contributions of ITS variables from effects of depression and anxiety for past-year suicide ideation, past-year and lifetime suicide attempts. Mediation analyses examined associations between risk factors and these suicide outcomes via mechanisms proposed by the ITS. RESULTS: Past-year suicide ideation was associated with burdensomeness, mental rehearsal of suicide plans (a facet of acquired capability), and depression. Greater feelings of burdensomeness, and reduced fear of death, marked out participants who had attempted suicide in comparison to those who had experienced suicide ideation in the past year. Relationship status was indirectly associated with past-year suicide ideation via the mediators of depression and burdensomeness, and was associated with past-year attempts via its effect on ideation. Age at diagnosis was unrelated to any variables. LIMITATIONS: Cross-sectional research is insensitive to causality and temporal dynamics, which is likely why interaction hypotheses from the ITS were unsupported. Normative measures may be invalid in autistic samples. There was no control group. The autistic sample was unrepresentative of the whole population, particularly autistic people with intellectual disabilities, ethnic/racial minorities, and gender minorities. CONCLUSIONS: Perceived burdensomeness and acquired capability appear potentially important to suicide in autistic people, and may mediate the effects of some risk factors. Future research should explore the temporal dynamics of suicide trajectories in longitudinal, prospective designs.
35313957|a|BACKGROUND: Eye tracking (ET) is a powerful methodology for studying attentional processes through quantification of eye movements. The precision, usability, and cost-effectiveness of ET render it a promising platform for developing biomarkers for use in clinical trials for autism spectrum disorder (ASD). METHODS: The autism biomarkers consortium for clinical trials conducted a multisite, observational study of 6-11-year-old children with ASD (n = 280) and typical development (TD, n = 119). The ET battery included: Activity Monitoring, Social Interactive, Static Social Scenes, Biological Motion Preference, and Pupillary Light Reflex tasks. A priori, gaze to faces in Activity Monitoring, Social Interactive, and Static Social Scenes tasks were aggregated into an Oculomotor Index of Gaze to Human Faces (OMI) as the primary outcome measure. This work reports on fundamental biomarker properties (data acquisition rates, construct validity, six-week stability, group discrimination, and clinical relationships) derived from these assays that serve as a base for subsequent development of clinical trial biomarker applications. RESULTS: All tasks exhibited excellent acquisition rates, met expectations for construct validity, had moderate or high six-week stabilities, and highlighted subsets of the ASD group with distinct biomarker performance. Within ASD, higher OMI was associated with increased memory for faces, decreased autism symptom severity, and higher verbal IQ and pragmatic communication skills. LIMITATIONS: No specific interventions were administered in this study, limiting information about how ET biomarkers track or predict outcomes in response to treatment. This study did not consider co-occurrence of psychiatric conditions nor specificity in comparison with non-ASD special populations, therefore limiting our understanding of the applicability of outcomes to specific clinical contexts-of-use. Research-grade protocols and equipment were used; further studies are needed to explore deployment in less standardized contexts. CONCLUSIONS: All ET tasks met expectations regarding biomarker properties, with strongest performance for tasks associated with attention to human faces and weakest performance associated with biological motion preference. Based on these data, the OMI has been accepted to the FDA's Biomarker Qualification program, providing a path for advancing efforts to develop biomarkers for use in clinical trials.
35313898|a|MECP2 duplication syndrome (MDS) is a rare, X-linked, neurodevelopmental disorder caused by a duplication of the methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2) gene-a gene in which loss-of-function mutations lead to Rett syndrome (RTT). MDS has an estimated live birth prevalence in males of 1/150,000. The key features of MDS include intellectual disability, developmental delay, hypotonia, seizures, recurrent respiratory infections, gastrointestinal problems, behavioural features of autism and dysmorphic features-although these comorbidities are not yet understood with sufficient granularity. This review has covered the past two decades of MDS case studies and series since the discovery of the disorder in 1999. After comprehensively reviewing the reported characteristics, this review has identified areas of limited knowledge that we recommend may be addressed by better phenotyping this disorder through an international data collection. This endeavour would also serve to delineate the clinical overlap between MDS and RTT.
35313865|a|BACKGROUND: Early diagnosis and management of children who are deafblind is important to alleviate the effects of deafblindness on the development of the child who is deafblind and their families. However, children who are deafblind are often misdiagnosed or diagnosed late. The misdiagnosis or late diagnosis has been attributed to many factors, one of which is the competence and confidence of healthcare professionals in differentially diagnosing deafblindness from other conditions, in most cases, autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The study therefore aimed to establish the competence and confidence of rehabilitation healthcare professionals in differentially diagnosing deafblindness from ASD in the South African context. METHODS: A cross-sectional survey design was employed for the study. An online questionnaire was distributed to rehabilitation healthcare professionals (N = 78) via Survey Monkey. Data were analyzed using descriptive and inferential statistics. Ethical clearance and permission were obtained from relevant stakeholders prior to the commencement of the study. RESULTS: Regarding the rehabilitation healthcare professionals in this study, 54% were competent in diagnosing ASD, while only 35% could correctly diagnose deafblindness. In some instances, symptoms were classified as associated with both ASD and deafblindness, when they were just those of deafblindness. Of all the rehabilitation healthcare professionals in this study, speech language therapists displayed the most knowledge of deafblindness. Furthermore, healthcare professionals who had between one and nine years of working experience had more knowledge of deafblindness than other professionals with more or less experience. CONCLUSION: Deafblindness is often underdiagnosed or misdiagnosed as ASD. This is due to the lack of competence and confidence of rehabilitation healthcare professionals in diagnosing it. The findings therefore highlight the need for training of rehabilitation healthcare professionals. Training on deafblindness could be included as part of the curriculum in the various undergraduate programs. Deafblindness could also form part of the Continuous Professional Development (CPD) training programs at various healthcare facilities. A team approach to the training would be ideal as it would facilitate peer learning and support. More research is required as it would inform evidence-based assessment, and management and support strategies for children who are deafblind and their families.
35313230|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental condition characterized by altered social communication, restricted interests, and stereotypic behaviors. Although the molecular and cellular pathogeneses of ASD remain elusive, impaired neural stem cell differentiation and neuronal migration during cortical development are suggested to be critically involved in ASD. ANK2, which encodes for a cytoskeletal scaffolding protein involved in recruiting membrane proteins into specialized membrane domains, has been identified as a high-confidence ASD risk gene. However, the role of ANK2 in early neural development remains unclear. In this study, we analyzed the role of ANK2 in the cerebral cortex of developing mouse using in utero electroporation. We provide evidence suggesting that ANK2 regulates neural stem cell differentiation and neuronal migration in the embryonic cerebral cortex, where Ank2 is highly expressed. We also demonstrated that Ank2 knockdown alters the expression of genes involved in neural development. Taken together, these results support the view that ANK2 haploinsufficiency in patients may impair neural development, resulting in an increased risk of ASD. Our study findings provide new insights into the molecular and cellular pathogenesis of ASD, given that among high-confidence ASD genes, ANK2 is rare in that it encodes for a scaffolding protein for the membrane protein complex required for neuronal functions.
35312241|a|Tourette's syndrome affects about 1% of the school-age population. Children and young people with the condition exhibit involuntary motor and vocal (also known as phonic) tics. Only 10% of those with Tourette's syndrome have coprolalia, which involves involuntary swearing and inappropriate language. Tourette's syndrome often presents with other conditions such as obsessive-compulsive disorder, autism and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Those affected by Tourette's syndrome may be able to manage the condition with little or no professional support, but some may need pharmacological and nonpharmacological input, particularly from mental health services. It is essential that peers, teachers, healthcare staff and members of the public are aware of Tourette's syndrome to ensure that children and young people living with the condition are supported well.
35311353|a|Aim: This study explores parental understanding and attitudes around pharmacogenomic results in their child(ren). Patients and methods: In-depth interviews with parents whose child(ren) had received a pharmacogenomic testing panel for management of neuropsychiatric medications were completed. Interviews were analyzed for themes and accuracy of understanding of results. Results: In 18 parents interviewed, 49/63 (78%) of statements made regarding results were accurate. Differences in understanding were seen by clinic, number of medications and result type. Parents expected results to guide prescribing and perceived the greatest utility in results that could impact current care. Results predicting normal drug metabolism may create mixed feelings. Conclusion: Parents perceive utility in pharmacogenomic testing for their children. Challenges exist in understanding probabilistic and multifactorial information about pharmacogenomic results.
35311037|a|Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) is a safe and effective therapy for pediatric patients with drug-resistant epilepsy (DRE). However, in children with DRE, the effects of VNS on autistic behaviors remain controversial. We retrospectively collected data from 10 children with DRE who underwent VNS implantation and regular parameter regulation in three pediatric epilepsy centers, and completed the behavioral assessments, including the autistic behavior checklist and the child behavior checklist, at follow-ups 1 (mean 2.16 years) and 2 (mean 2.98 years). The 10 children maintained stable seizure control between the two follow-ups. Their autistic behaviors, especially in language, social and self-help, were reduced at follow-up 2 compared to follow-up 1 (p = 0.01, p = 0.01, respectively). Moreover, these improvements were not associated with their seizure control, whether it was positive or negative. These results suggested that the VNS had a positive effect on autistic behaviors, which provided a preliminary clinical basis that VNS may benefit to younger children with DRE comorbidity autism spectrum disorder (ASD).
35310859|a|Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological diseases. Epileptic individuals are faced with seizures, which are largely caused by enhanced neuronal excitability and/or decreased neuronal inhibitory activity. SCN2A encodes a neuronal voltage-gated sodium channel, NaV1.2 that is primarily found in excitatory neurons throughout the brain. NaV1.2 is most concentrated within the principal neurons of the corticostriatal circuit, which includes pyramidal neurons in the medial prefrontal cortex and medium spiny neurons in the striatum. In the early stage of adult development, the NaV1.2 channel plays critical roles in generation and propagation of action potentials in these neurons. Gain of Function variants of SCN2A results in unprovoked seizures and epilepsy, while loss-of-function variants of SCN2A is a leading cause for autism spectrum disorder as well as intellectual disability. Previous studies have shown that full deletion of Scn2a gene in mice is lethal and partial disruption of Scn2a gene (less than 50%) leads to inhibition of neuronal excitability. A recent study from Dr. Yang's laboratory revealed an unexpected result from mice with severe NaV1.2 deficiency and they demonstrated that severe deletion of Scn2a gene (around 68% gene disruption) in NaV1.2 triggers neuronal hyperexcitability in adult mice. Their findings may explain the puzzling clinical observation that certain individuals with NaV1.2 deficiency still develop unprovoked seizure. With the knowledge that using sodium-channel blockers simply exacerbates the seizure, the need for understanding the intrinsic nature of the NaV1.2 channel provides an important research topic in the future.
35310549|a|
35310466|a|Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (dMRI) of the brainstem is technically challenging, especially in young autistic children as nearby tissue-air interfaces and motion (voluntary and physiological) can lead to artifacts. This limits the availability of high-resolution images, which are desirable for improving the ability to study brainstem structures. Furthermore, inherently low signal-to-noise ratios, geometric distortions, and sensitivity to motion not related to molecular diffusion have resulted in limited techniques for high-resolution data acquisition compared to other modalities such as T1-weighted imaging. Here, we implement a method for achieving increased apparent spatial resolution in pediatric dMRI that hinges on accurate geometric distortion correction and on high fidelity within subject image registration between dMRI and magnetization prepared rapid acquisition gradient echo (MPnRAGE) images. We call this post-processing pipeline T1 weighted-diffusion fused, or "TiDi-Fused". Data used in this work consists of dMRI data (2.4 mm resolution, corrected using FSL's Topup) and T1-weighted (T1w) MPnRAGE anatomical data (1 mm resolution) acquired from 128 autistic and non-autistic children (ages 6-10 years old). Accurate correction of geometric distortion permitted for a further increase in apparent resolution of the dMRI scan via boundary-based registration to the MPnRAGE T1w. Estimation of fiber orientation distributions and further analyses were carried out in the T1w space. Data processed with the TiDi-Fused method were qualitatively and quantitatively compared to data processed with conventional dMRI processing methods. Results show the advantages of the TiDi-Fused pipeline including sharper brainstem gray-white matter tissue contrast, improved inter-subject spatial alignment for group analyses of dMRI based measures, accurate spatial alignment with histology-based imaging of the brainstem, reduced variability in brainstem-cerebellar white matter tracts, and more robust biologically plausible relationships between age and brainstem-cerebellar white matter tracts. Overall, this work identifies a promising pipeline for achieving high-resolution imaging of brainstem structures in pediatric and clinical populations who may not be able to endure long scan times. This pipeline may serve as a gateway for feasibly elucidating brainstem contributions to autism and other conditions.
35310290|a|The specific aims of this research study were to (a) examine the differential effect of three different music interventions, namely the interactive music playing therapy ("music and singing"), interaction music singing therapy ("singing"), and receptive music therapy ("listening") studying the varying latency periods in the response time it took 3-year-old children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) to elicit the target word vocally; and (b) assess the index of happiness of children with ASD after the implementation of the three music interventions, which can, in turn, be used to influence their overall quality of life through this specific intervention. This study used a combined single-subject research design consisting of delayed multiple baseline across the participants and a multielement design to compare the effects of each music intervention technique targeting the child's verbal response during playback of a practiced song. Findings demonstrated "singing" to be associated with the lowest latency compared to the other two interventions ("listening" and "singing and music") across participants. Additionally, happiness levels varied from neutral to happy, signifying an overall positive experience during participation in the music applied behavior analysis (ABA) intervention.
35310287|a|Social impairment is a defining phenotypic feature of autism. The present study investigated whether individuals with autistic traits exhibit altered perceptions of social emotions. Two groups of participants (High-AQ and Low-AQ) were recruited based on their scores on the autism-spectrum quotient (AQ). Their behavioral responses and event-related potentials (ERPs) elicited by social and non-social stimuli with positive, negative, and neutral emotional valence were compared in two experiments. In Experiment 1, participants were instructed to view social-emotional and non-social emotional pictures. In Experiment 2, participants were instructed to listen to social-emotional and non-social emotional audio recordings. More negative emotional reactions and smaller amplitudes of late ERP components (the late positive potential in Experiment 1 and the late negative component in Experiment 2) were found in the High-AQ group than in the Low-AQ group in response to the social-negative stimuli. In addition, amplitudes of these late ERP components in both experiments elicited in response to social-negative stimuli were correlated with the AQ scores of the High-AQ group. These results suggest that individuals with autistic traits have altered emotional processing of social-negative emotions.
35310097|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by deficits in social communication, social interaction, and repetitive restricted behaviors (RRBs). It is usually detected in early childhood. RRBs are behavioral patterns characterized by repetition, inflexibility, invariance, inappropriateness, and frequent lack of obvious function or specific purpose. To date, the classification of RRBs is contentious. Understanding the potential mechanisms of RRBs in children with ASD, such as neural connectivity disorders and abnormal immune functions, will contribute to finding new therapeutic targets. Although behavioral intervention remains the most effective and safe strategy for RRBs treatment, some promising drugs and new treatment options (e.g., supplementary and cell therapy) have shown positive effects on RRBs in recent studies. In this review, we summarize the latest advances of RRBs from mechanistic to therapeutic approaches and propose potential future directions in research on RRBs.
35309933|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is defined as a complex heterogeneous disorder and characterized by stereotyped behavior and deficits in communication and social interactions. The emerging microbial knowledge has pointed to a potential link between gut microbiota dysbiosis and ASD. Evidence from animal and human studies showed that shifts in composition and activity of the gut microbiota may causally contribute to the etiopathogenesis of core symptoms in the ASD individuals with gastrointestinal tract disturbances and act on microbiota-gut-brain. In this review, we summarized the characterized gut bacterial composition of ASD and the involvement of gut microbiota and their metabolites in the onset and progression of ASD; the possible underlying mechanisms are also highlighted. Given this correlation, we also provide an overview of the microbial-based therapeutic interventions such as probiotics, antibiotics, fecal microbiota transplantation therapy, and dietary interventions and address their potential benefits on behavioral symptoms of ASD. The precise contribution of altering gut microbiome to treating core symptoms in the ASD needs to be further clarified. It seemed to open up promising avenues to develop microbial-based therapies in ASD.
35309142|a|In clinical genetic testing, checking the concordance between self-reported gender and genotype-inferred gender from genomic data is a significant quality control measure because mismatched gender due to sex chromosomal abnormalities or misregistration of clinical information can significantly affect molecular diagnosis and treatment decisions. Targeted gene sequencing (TGS) is widely recommended as a first-tier diagnostic step in clinical genetic testing. However, the existing gender-inference tools are optimized for whole genome and whole exome data and are not adequate and accurate for analyzing TGS data. In this study, we validated a new gender-inference tool, seGMM, which uses unsupervised clustering (Gaussian mixture model) to determine the gender of a sample. The seGMM tool can also identify sex chromosomal abnormalities in samples by aligning the sequencing reads from the genotype data. The seGMM tool consistently demonstrated >99% gender-inference accuracy in a publicly available 1,000-gene panel dataset from the 1,000 Genomes project, an in-house 785 hearing loss gene panel dataset of 16,387 samples, and a 187 autism risk gene panel dataset from the Autism Clinical and Genetic Resources in China (ACGC) database. The performance and accuracy of seGMM was significantly higher for the targeted gene sequencing (TGS), whole exome sequencing (WES), and whole genome sequencing (WGS) datasets compared to the other existing gender-inference tools such as PLINK, seXY, and XYalign. The results of seGMM were confirmed by the short tandem repeat analysis of the sex chromosome marker gene, amelogenin. Furthermore, our data showed that seGMM accurately identified sex chromosomal abnormalities in the samples. In conclusion, the seGMM tool shows great potential in clinical genetics by determining the sex chromosomal karyotypes of samples from massively parallel sequencing data with high accuracy.
35308895|a|Objectives: Previous reviews highlight the similarities in teaching healthcare and hygiene routines to individuals with and without intellectual and developmental disabilities. Additionally, similar interventions are used when interfering behaviors occur. Although these routines are topographically distinct, there are enough similarities to suggest effective procedures for one routine may be used to inform another. This scooping review aims to identify effective teaching and intervention procedures for healthcare and hygiene routines specifically for individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities. We also evaluated the extent to which functional analyses were conducted; a dimension not included in previous reviews. Methods: Eligible articles targeted compliance or tolerance within the context of a defined healthcare or hygiene routine as a dependent variable and used an experimental design with a demonstration of experimental control. Articles were identified through PsycINFO, PubMed, and Academic Search Premier databases. Additionally, a hand search of five related journals was conducted. Data were collected on dependent variables, functional analyses, baseline contingencies, teaching procedures, and additional experimental components. Results: A total of 52 articles met inclusion criteria. Most experiments produced positive outcomes. The findings show all experiments involved a treatment package with multiple components. The most common teaching procedures were graduated exposure and DRA. A lack of functional analyses and social validity was noted. Conclusions: Component analyses are needed to identify the most effective and efficient procedures. Pyramidal training to teach medical professionals how to provide preventative pyramidal training should be explored. Supplementary Information: The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s41252-022-00249-7.
35308891|a|Objective: Although autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a relatively common, well-known but heterogeneous neuropsychiatric disorder, specific knowledge about characteristics of this heterogeneity is scarce. There is consensus that IQ contributes to this heterogeneity as well as complicates diagnostics and treatment planning. In this study, we assessed the accuracy of the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS/2) in the whole and IQ-defined subsamples, and analyzed if the ADOS/2 accuracy may be increased by the application of machine learning (ML) algorithms that processed additional information including the IQ level. Methods: The study included 1,084 individuals: 440 individuals with ASD (with a mean IQ level of 3.3 +- 1.5) and 644 individuals without ASD (with a mean IQ level of 3.2 +- 1.2). We applied and analyzed Random Forest (RF) and Decision Tree (DT) to the ADOS/2 data, compared their accuracy to ADOS/2 cutoff algorithms, and examined most relevant items to distinguish between ASD and Non-ASD. In sum, we included 49 individual features, independently of the applied ADOS module. Results: In DT analyses, we observed that for the decision ASD/Non-ASD, solely one to four items are sufficient to differentiate between groups with high accuracy. In addition, in sub-cohorts of individuals with (a) below (IQ level >=4)/ID and (b) above average intelligence (IQ level <= 2), the ADOS/2 cutoff showed reduced accuracy. This reduced accuracy results in (a) a three times higher risk of false-positive diagnoses or (b) a 1.7 higher risk for false-negative diagnoses; both errors could be significantly decreased by the application of the alternative ML algorithms. Conclusions: Using ML algorithms showed that a small set of ADOS/2 items could help clinicians to more accurately detect ASD in clinical practice across all IQ levels and to increase diagnostic accuracy especially in individuals with below and above average IQ level.
35308873|a|Depression is more prevalent among autistic adults than neurotypical adults, yet risk factors are incompletely understood in this population. Some research groups have focused on relationships between negative repetitive thinking and depression in the autistic population, which may explain elevated prevalence rates in line with general population findings on rumination and internalizing disorders. Little is known about associations between depression and more prototypical repetitive cognitions and/or behaviors characteristic of autism (i.e., insistence on sameness [IS] and repetitive sensorimotor [RSM] behaviors). Therefore, the present study aimed to examine associations between IS, RSM behaviors, and depressive symptoms in 762 autistic adults, and whether observed effects are confounded by additional factors (e.g., demographic factors, trait neuroticism). To test if greater IS scores were associated with greater depressive symptoms on the BDI-II, a Bayesian linear regression was conducted with BDI-II scores (dependent variable) regressed on age, gender, educational level, RSM scores, and IS scores (independent variables). To test the effects of neuroticism on observed relationships, a second regression was conducted that included all predictors from the baseline model and neuroticism. Standardized regression coefficients were tested against an interval null hypothesis of [-0.1, 0.1] to assess for practical significance. Results indicated that IS exhibited a moderate positive relationship with depressive symptoms, while RSM behaviors provided only a slight increase in predictive ability. However in the second model, neuroticism exhibited a strong positive relationship with depressive symptoms, completely attenuating the effect of IS. Associations between RSM behaviors and depressive symptoms did not meet our criteria for practical significance, particularly when neuroticism was added to the model. Neither RSM nor IS moderated the effect of neuroticism on depression. The findings from this study add to the literature on risk factors in the pathway to depression in autism, and suggest opportunities for clinical translation to screening and intervention efforts. Screening for IS in autistic individuals is a common diagnostic practice in clinical and research settings that may be leveraged to also identify those at higher risk for depression, and increasing flexibility in daily life may promote emotional regulation and distress tolerance.
35308696|a|OBJECTIVE: Social Pediatrics focuses on targeting and mitigating the effects of the social determinants of health on a child's well-being and development. Negative health outcomes have been seen in children who have faced poverty, food insecurity, inadequate housing, and traumatic events. In particular, children who come from socioeconomically disadvantaged households are more likely to develop behavioural problems. The purpose of this study is to explore the experiences of caregivers for children with a behaviour-related disorder. This includes children affected by attention, academic, and social issues (e.g. attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, autism spectrum disorder). This study will aim to understand the strengths, barriers, and social limitations to accessing and receiving care for children with behavioural disorders.  Methods: A qualitative descriptive design was used to conduct three focus groups. Of the 64 caregivers contacted, a total of 13 participants agreed to be in the study. All focus groups were analyzed using inductive thematic analysis.  Results: Preliminary findings suggest that caregivers value pediatricians who spend time, communicate, and make a human connection with their patients. Barriers included physician turnover, long wait times for referrals, and a lack of knowledge regarding services and programs available in their area. Three major themes emerged from this study including (1) timeliness to care, (2) advocacy, and (3) relationship building. CONCLUSION: Findings suggested that caregivers valued pediatricians who spend time to make a human connection with their patients. Barriers included physician turnover, long wait times for referrals, and a lack of knowledge of available services. Caregivers who were young mothers felt an added layer of judgement when accessing the necessary care for their children. This study is important as it contributes to our knowledge on the role Social Pediatrics can play in the care of children with behaviour-related disorders.
35308672|a|An eight-year-old boy with autism developed gradual onset of vision loss and nyctalopia. Dietary history revealed a diet of only French fries and potato chips for the past four years. As a result, serum vitamin A was severely below the normal level. Ophthalmologic examination revealed a normal anterior segment with bilateral optic atrophy. Vitamin A supplementation was given to restore to normal level; however, the visual impairment was irreversible. Vitamin A deficiency is common in developing countries; however, to the best of our knowledge, there are no other reported cases of permanent visual loss secondary to vitamin A deficiency in Malaysia.
35307629|a|OBJECTIVE: Cognitive developmental delay is a picture of the group of early-onset chronic diseases that affect 1.5-10% of children. Autism spectrum disorders are neurodevelopmental diseases with a genetic basis and abnormal brain development, characterized by disorders in areas that make up interpersonal relationships, such as communication, social cognition, and processing of emotional signals. Immune system dysfunction is thought to play a role in the pathogenesis of some neurological disorders, including autism. Progranulin is thought to be a regulator of the innate immune response. The purpose of this study was to look at plasma levels of progranulin, an anti-inflammatory neurotrophic factor, in children with autism spectrum disorder and cognitive developmental delay. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study was conducted on 52 children who were patients and 35 healthy children. Of the 52 children of the patient group, 32 were diagnosed with CDD and 20 were diagnosed with cognitive developmental delay-autism spectrum disorder. Serum progranulin concentrations were measured using a human-specific sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. RESULTS: Serum progranulin concentration was statistically lower in the patient group (110.746 +- 26.04) than in the healthy control group (137.346 +- 30.02). There was a statistically significant difference between the groups in levels of serum progranulin (P=.000). Receiver operating characteristic analysis was performed to evaluate the potential of progranulin as a biomarker to distinguish patients with cognitive developmental delay-autism spectrum disorder from healthy children. It detected a moderate area under the curve (0.743 +- 0.06) value and a more significant P value for progranulin (P=.000). CONCLUSION: Progranulin deficiency in patients with autism spectrum disorder-cognitive developmental delay may result in decreased neurotrophic support for many years, with cumulative damage associated with unregulated inflammation that may play a role in autism spectrum disorder-cognitive developmental delay. We believe that low progranulin levels could be a biomarker for autism spectrum disorder-cognitive developmental delay.
35307405|a|Developmental disabilities are defined as disorders that result in the limitation of function due to impaired development of the nervous system; these disabilities can be present in the form of impairments in learning, language, behavior, or physical abilities. Examples of developmental disorders include attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), cerebral palsy (CP), hearing loss, blindness, intellectual disability, and learning disability. Of these disorders, ASD prevalence was 18.5 per 1000 children (1 in 54) aged 8 in 2016. Current literature suggests that deficient levels of heparan sulfate (HS), an acidic and linear glycosaminoglycan (GAG), is likely causative of ASD. The cascading effect of deficient HS levels can offer compelling evidence for the association of HS with ASD. Deficient levels of HS lead to defective Slit/Robo signaling, which affects axonal guidance and dendritic spine formation. Defective Slit/Robo signaling leads to increased Arp2/3 activity and dendritic spine density, which has been observed in the brains of persons with ASD. Therefore, interventions that target HS and its associated pathways may be viable treatment options for ASD.
35306998|a|BACKGROUND: The discovery of the vaccination technique has been revealed by Edward Jenner in 1796: undoubtedly, it represents the first scientific attempt to control an infectious disease by vaccines, followed by other important studies carried out by Pasteur and Koch, and Sabin, who developed the first technique to attenuate the virus. In recent decades, numerous scholars have begun to create dangerous theories against the effectiveness of vaccines through scientifically invalid or fraudulent studies. AIM: This critical review of the literature aims to analyse the main factors that have undermined the credibility of vaccines in the general population, to disprove false information and, on the other hand, emphasize the benefits of vaccines over the last 200 years. DISCUSSIONS: Unfortunately, several studies have been carried out without the proper scientific rigour. The most impacting example is the study published by Andrew Wakefield in the Lancet journal that tried to correlate vaccines with the development of autism: this publication was withdrawn from the journal a few years after its publication, but the impact of incorrect scientific studies, fake news, and ambiguous healthcare policies has led to an adverse general opinion about the effectiveness of vaccines. CONCLUSION: The excess of uncontrolled information is a serious concerning in the Coronavirus pandemic. The modern science must tackle this problem with a better willingness to communicate even the clinical studies to those people not able to understand the medical information autonomously. Nevertheless, a reliable science must also limit the dissemination of studies that do not meet the basic criteria of a methodological rigor and certainty of results, in order not to feed confusion in the scientific community.
35306461|a|BACKGROUND: Group social skills interventions (GSSIs) are offered to youth with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) to improve social functioning. This systematic review focused on the adolescent population, including a wider range of disabilities. AIMS: To evaluate effectiveness of GSSIs at improving social functioning in adolescents with congenital, acquired or developmental disabilities. METHODS AND PROCEDURES: Databases, trial registries and dissertations were systematically searched and a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials conducted. Study screening, risk-of-bias assessment and Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation were completed. OUTCOMES AND RESULTS: Sixteen studies (n = 1119), 15 with adolescents with ASD and one with brain tumor survivors, revealed GSSIs reduced social impairment on the Social Responsiveness Scale (mean difference (MD) 9.68, 95% CI 5.63-13.73; P < 0.001), increased social skills on the Social Skill Improvement System Rating Scales (SMD 0.38, 95% CI 0.10-0.65; P = 0.007), and improved adolescent social knowledge on the Test of Adolescent Social Skills (MD 7.43 points, 95% CI 5.36-9.50; P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: There is moderate certainty evidence that GSSIs improve social responsiveness, social skills and knowledge, and low certainty of evidence to improve social participation for adolescents with ASD. High quality randomized studies are required to inform clinical practice with adolescents with other disabilities. WHAT THIS PAPER ADDS: Current evidence for group social skills interventions (GSSIs) is for adolescents with autism (ASD). GSSIs likely improve social knowledge and reduce impairments in adolescents with ASD, however the effect of GSSIs on social participation is not well understood. Only one randomized trial investigated GSSIs in another population of adolescents, highlighting the need for more high-quality studies including adolescents with other disabilities.
35306277|a|Gender dysphoria, characterised by distress associated with an incongruence between an individual's assigned and experienced gender, is encountered in 1%-2% of children and adolescents. Recent findings suggest neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), including Autism, are frequently reported among youth with Gender Dysphoria. This study aims to explore the frequency of NDDs in children and adolescents presenting to a hospital-based gender service, and to investigate the contribution of autistic traits and general psychological distress to distress pertaining to gender. Sixty-four participants (mean age = 12.91 years) with Gender Dysphoria were recruited to this study. Self- and caregiver-report questionnaires were used to evaluate psychological distress, autistic traits, and distress pertaining to gender. Relative to the rest of the participants, the 13 (20.31%) with a co-occurring NDD diagnosis reported elevated autistic traits (p < .001). They did not differ in terms of psychological distress or distress pertaining to gender. A hierarchical linear regression revealed autistic traits alone did not contribute to the variability in distress pertaining to gender, whereas general psychological distress accounted for 9.9% of the variability in distress pertaining to gender (p = .012). The current findings indicate that NDD diagnoses are common in children and adolescents with Gender Dysphoria who attend hospital-based services. Psychological distress, rather than autistic traits, contributes more variability in distress pertaining to gender. Taken together, these findings indicate the need to consider NDDs in treatment plans but also to focus on the important relationship between psychological distress and Gender Dysphoria.
35305960|a|BACKGROUND: Evidence indicates that in utero exposure to chorioamnionitis might increase the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders in the offspring. However, findings on this topic have been inconsistent. OBJECTIVE: To examine the association between chorioamnionitis and neurodevelopmental disorders in offspring. STUDY DESIGN: This was a retrospective population-based cohort study in Sweden. A total of 2,228,280 singleton live births and stillbirths between 1998 and 2019 were included in our study population. Data on maternal characteristics and neurodevelopmental disorders in offspring were obtained by individual record-linkages of nationwide Swedish registries. Chorioamnionitis was identified using the Medical Birth Registry. Inpatient and outpatient diagnoses were obtained for cerebral palsy, autism, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, epilepsy, and intellectual disability. Multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression was used to estimate the association between chorioamnionitis and each neurodevelopmental disorders with adjusted hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals. A causal mediation analysis of the relationship between chorioamnionitis and neurodevelopmental disorders with preterm delivery (<37 weeks) was performed. RESULTS: A total of 5,770 (0.26%) offspring were exposed to chorioamnionitis during pregnancy. During the study's follow-up time there were 4,752 (0.21%) cases of cerebral palsy, 17,897 (0.80 %) cases of epilepsy, 50,570 (2.27 %) cases of autism, 114,087 (5.12%) cases of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and 14,574 (0.65%) cases of intellectual disability. After adjusting for potential confounders, exposure to chorioamnionitis increased the hazard ratios of cerebral palsy (adjusted hazard ratio, 7.43; 95% confidence interval (5.90-9.37), autism (adjusted hazard ratio, 1.43; 95% confidence interval (1.21-1.68), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (adjusted hazard ratio, 1.17; 95% confidence interval (1.03-1.33) and intellectual disability (adjusted hazard ratio, 1.99; 95% confidence interval, 1.53-2.58), while chorioamnionitis was not significantly associated with higher rates of epilepsy in offspring. Mediation analysis revealed that these associations were mainly explained through preterm delivery, however, increased risk was also observed among term infants. CONCLUSION: Chorioamnionitis increases the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders, particularly cerebral palsy, autism, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and intellectual disability. These associations were mainly mediated through preterm delivery. Efforts for timely identification and appropriate interventions to treat infections during pregnancy will have sustained benefits in reducing the burden of neurological complications in children at the population level.
35305821|a|BACKGROUND: Several recent studies have suggested a role for infections in the development of mental disorders; however, the genetic contribution to this association is understudied. METHODS: We use the iPSYCH case-cohort genotyped sample (n = 65,534) and Danish health care registry data to study the genetic association between infections and mental disorders. To test the hypothesis that these associations are due to genetic pleiotropy, we estimated the genetic correlation between infection and mental disorders. Polygenic risk scores (PRSs) were used to assess whether genetic pleiotropy of infections and mental disorders was mediated by actual infection diagnoses. RESULTS: We observed that schizophrenia, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder (rg ranging between 0.18 and 0.83), but not autism spectrum disorder and anorexia nervosa, were significantly genetically correlated with infection diagnoses. PRSs for infections were associated with modest increase in risk of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, major depressive disorder, and schizophrenia in the iPSYCH case-cohort (hazard ratios = 1.04 to 1.10) but was not associated with risk of anorexia, autism, or bipolar disorder. Using mediation analysis, we show that infection diagnoses account for only a small proportion (6%-14%) of the risk for mental disorders conferred by infection PRSs. CONCLUSIONS: Infections and mental disorders share a modest genetic architecture. Infection PRSs can predict risk of certain mental disorders; however, this effect is moderate. Finally, recorded infections partially explain the relationship between infection PRSs and mental disorders.
35305746|a|BACKGROUND: Autistic children can have difficulty generalising treatment effects beyond the immediate treatment context. Paediatric Autism Communication Therapy (PACT) has been successful when delivered in the clinic. Here we tested the Paediatric Autism Communication Therapy-Generalised (PACT-G) intervention combined between home and education settings for its overall effect and mechanistic transmission of effect across contexts. METHODS: In this parallel, single-blind, randomised, controlled trial, we recruited autistic children aged 2-11 years in urban or semi-urban areas in Manchester, Newcastle, and London, England. Children needed to meet core autism criteria on Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule-second edition (ADOS-2) and parent-rated Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ-lifetime), and children older than 5 years were included if they had intentional communication but expressive language equivalent of age 4 years or younger. Eligible children were randomly assigned (1:1), using block randomisation (random block sizes of 2 and 4) and stratified for site, age (2-4 years vs 5-11 years), and gender, to either PACT-G plus treatment as usual or treatment as usual alone. Research assessors were masked to treatment allocation. The PACT-G intervention was delivered by a therapist in parallel to the child's parents at home and to learning-support assistants (LSA) at their place of education, using both in-person and remote sessions over a 6 month period, to optimise adult-child social interaction. Treatment as usual included any health support or intervention from education or local community services. The primary outcome was autism symptom severity using the ADOS-2, as measured by researchers, at 12 months versus baseline. Secondary outcomes were Brief Observation of Social Communication Change (BOSCC) and dyadic social interaction between child and adult across contexts, both at 12 months. Other secondary outcome measures were assessed using the following composites: language, anxiety, repetitive behaviour, adaptive behaviour, parental wellbeing, child health-related quality of life, and disruptive behaviour. Assessments were done at baseline, 7 months, and 12 months. We used an intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis of covariance for the efficacy outcome measures. Adverse events were assessed by researchers for all trial families at each contact and by therapists in the PACT-G group at each visit. This study is registered with the ISRCTN Registry, ISRCTN 25378536. FINDINGS: Between Jan 18, 2017, and April 19, 2018, 555 children were referred and 249 were eligible, agreed to participate, and were randomly assigned to either PACT-G (n=122) or treatment as usual (n=127). One child in the PACT-G group withdrew and requested their data be removed from the study, giving an ITT population of 248 children. 51 (21%) of 248 children were female, 197 (79%) were male, 149 (60%) were White, and the mean age was 4 0 years (SD 0 6). The groups were well balanced for demographic and clinical characteristics. In the PACT-G group, parents of children received a median of 10 (IQR 8-12) home sessions and LSAs received a median of 8 (IQR 5-10) education sessions over 6 months. We found no treatment effect on the ADOS-2 primary outcome compared with treatment as usual (effect size 0 04 [95% CI -0 19 to 0 26]; p=0 74), or researcher-assessed BOSCC (0 03 [-0 25 to 0 31]), language composite (-0 03 [-0 15 to 0 10]), repetitive behaviour composite (0 00 [-0 35 to 0 35]), adaptive behaviour composite (0 01 [-0 15 to 0 18]), or child wellbeing (0 09 [-0 15 to 0 34]). PACT-G treatment improved synchronous response in both parent (0 50 [0 36 to 0 65]) and LSA (0 33 [0 16 to 0 50]), mediating increased child communication with parent (0 26 [0 12 to 0 40]) and LSA (0 20 [0 06 to 0 34]). Child dyadic communication change mediated outcome symptom alteration on BOSCC at home (indirect effect -0 78 [SE 0 34; 95% CI -1 44 to -0 11]; p=0 022) although not in education (indirect effect -0 67 [SE 0 37; 95% CI -1 40 to 0 06]; p=0 073); such an effect was not seen on ADOS-2. Treatment with PACT-G also improved the parental wellbeing composite (0 44 [0 08 to 0 79]) and the child disruptive behaviour composite in home and education (0 29 [0 01 to 0 57]). Adverse events on child behaviour and wellbeing were recorded in 13 (10%) of 127 children in the treatment as usual group (of whom four [31%] were girls) and 11 (9%) of 122 in the PACT-G group (of whom three [33%] were girls). One serious adverse event on parental mental health was recorded in the PACT-G group and was possibly study related. INTERPRETATION: Although we found no effect on the primary outcome compared with treatment as usual, adaptation of the 12-month PACT intervention into briefer multicomponent delivery across home and education preserved the positive proximal outcomes, although smaller in effect size, and the original pattern of treatment mediation seen in clinic-delivered therapy, as well as improving parental wellbeing and child disruptive behaviours across home and school. Reasons for this reduced efficacy might be the reduced dose of each component, the effect of remote delivery, and the challenges of the delivery contexts. Caution is needed in assuming that changing delivery methods and context will preserve an original intervention efficacy for autistic children. FUNDING: National Institute for Health Research and Medical Research Council Efficacy and Mechanism Evaluation Award.
35305681|a|BACKGROUND: Looked after children (LAC) that are placed in either a foster, kinship, residential care setting or transition to adoption continue to develop debilitating disorders that significantly impact their overall health and social well-being. The prevalence of these disorders is often depicted under broad categories such as mental, behavioural or neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Limited in research is the prevalence of what specific disorders fall under these broad categories. NDDs such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) which fall under an umbrella group in the expert field of genetics and neuropsychiatry will be explored. Unsupported, these disorders can lead to suboptimal health and social outcomes for both the child and family. In the general population, the prevalence of these NDDs and impacts on health and social well-being are relatively well documented, but for minority groups such as LAC, research is extremely limited. This review aims to estimate the prevalence of NDDs among LAC and explore how they might impact the health and social well-being of these vulnerable children. If feasible, the review will compare the prevalence rates to those children who are not looked after, to illuminate any differences or similarities between populations. METHODS: PubMed, ASSIA, IBSS, Web of Science, PsychINFO, Scopus, Psych articles, Social Care Online, secondary, grey literature and government publications will be searched to identify any eligible studies. No restrictions will be placed on country, design or year of publication. Studies must provide primary data on the prevalence or incidence of NDDs for individuals < 25 years of age, supported by either a diagnostic code, standardised diagnostic assessment tool or survey response. The Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) critical appraisal tools will be utilised to assess the quality and bias and the random-effects model used to estimate a pooled prevalence of NDDs. DISCUSSION: Attaining an estimated prevalence of these NDDs and identifying any impacts on health and social well-being might inform key stakeholders in health, educational and social sectors with important information that might aid in the early identification and intervention to safeguard and meet the unique needs of these children. SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: PROSPERO CRD4201913103 .
35305592|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and schizotypal personality disorder can be difficult to distinguish. Deficits in social relationships and social interaction, present in both conditions, are known to impair quality of life. The aim of the present study was to investigate if schizotypal symptoms affect quality of life among adults diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder and to study the association between schizotypy and autistic traits among them. METHODS: Participants diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (n = 110) completed questionnaires exploring schizotypy (Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire - Brief Revised (SPQ-BR)), autistic traits (The Ritvo Autism, Asperger Diagnostic Scale-Revised Screen 14 items), anxiety and depression (The Hospital Anxiety and Depression scale) and quality of life (Brunnsviken Brief Quality of Life Scale and the European quality of life index version 5D). RESULTS: Schizotypy was found to be associated with anxiety, depressive and autistic symptoms, and poor quality of life. Although schizotypy was a predictor for impaired quality of life, this relationship was mediated by symptoms of anxiety and depression, plausibly inherent to autism. Autistic traits were positively associated with all higher order constructs of the SPQ-BR, i.e. positive and negative schizotypy, disorganization and social anxiety, as well as with poor quality of life. CONCLUSIONS: There is considerable overlap between schizotypy and autism that needs to be considered in research. Prominent schizotypal traits in people with ASD may constitute an endophenotype coinciding with a particularly poor quality of life. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier:  NCT03570372 : Internet-based Treatment for Adults with Autism Spectrum Disorder (MILAS).
35305544|a|The purpose of this study was to examine the effectiveness of a video modeling (VM) intervention package (including virtual manipulatives and error correction) delivered via synchronous, virtual environment to teach the mathematics skills of addition, number comparison, and subtraction to a five-year old autistic child. Using a multiple probe across skills design of a single-case experimental design, we examined whether a causal relation existed between the intervention and the child's improved accuracy of mathematics problem-solving. Following the intervention, the autistic child showed improved accuracy across all three skills and continued to solve problems with 100% accuracy during the generalization phase, which also served as the immediate maintenance phase.
35305538|a|The relationship between trace elements and neurological development is an emerging research focus. We performed a case-control study to explore (1) the differences of 13 trace elements chromium (Cr), manganese (Mn), cobalt (Co), zinc (Zn), arsenic (As), selenium (Se), molybdenum (Mo), cadmium (Cd), stannum (Sn), stibium (Sb), mercury (Hg), titanium (TI), and plumbum (Pb) concentration in whole blood and urine between autism spectrum disorder (ASD) children and their typical development peers, and (2) the association between the 13 trace elements and core behaviors of ASD. Thirty ASD subjects (cases) and 30 age-sex-matched healthy subjects from Baise City, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China, were recruited. Element analysis was carried out by inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry. Autistic behaviors were assessed using Autism Behavior Checklist (ABC), Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS), and Children Neuropsychological and Behavior Scale (CNBS). The whole blood concentrations of Mo (p = 0.004), Cd (0.007), Sn (p = 0.003), and Pb (p = 0.037) were significantly higher in the ASD cases than in the controls. Moreover, Se (0.393), Hg (0.408), and Mn (- 0.373) concentrations were significantly correlated between whole blood and urine levels in ASD case subjects. There were significant correlations between whole blood Sb (0.406), Tl (0.365), Mo (- 0.4237), Mn (- 0.389), Zn (0.476), and Se (0.375) levels and core behaviors of ASD. Although the mechanism of trace element imbalance in ASD is unclear, these data demonstrate that core behaviors of ASD may be affected by certain trace elements. Further studies are recommended for exploring the mechanism of element imbalance and providing corresponding clinical treatment measures.
35305447|a|Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) as a promising tool to investigate psychotic disorders can be decomposed into useful imaging features such as time courses (TCs) of independent components (ICs) and functional network connectivity (FNC) calculated by TC cross-correlation. TCs reflect the temporal dynamics of brain activity and the FNC characterizes temporal coherence across intrinsic brain networks. Both features have been used as input to deep learning approaches with decent results. However, few studies have tried to leverage their complementary information to learn optimal representations at multiple facets. Motivated by this, we proposed a Hybrid Deep Learning Framework integrating brain Connectivity and Activity (HDLFCA) together by combining convolutional recurrent neural network (C-RNN) and deep neural network (DNN), aiming to improve classification accuracy and interpretability simultaneously. Specifically, C-RNNAM was proposed to extract temporal dynamic dependencies with an attention module (AM) to automatically learn discriminative knowledge from TC nodes, while DNN was applied to identify the most group-discriminative FNC patterns with layer-wise relevance propagation (LRP). Then, both prediction outputs were concatenated to build a new feature matrix, generating the final decision by logistic regression. The effectiveness of HDLFCA was validated on both multi-site schizophrenia (SZ, n ~ 1100) and public autism datasets (ABIDE, n ~ 1522) by outperforming 12 alternative models at 2.8-8.9% accuracy, including 8 models using either static FNC or TCs and 4 models using dynamic FNC. Appreciable classification accuracy was achieved for HC vs. SZ (85.3%) and HC vs. Autism (72.4%) respectively. More importantly, the most group-discriminative brain regions can be easily attributed and visualized, providing meaningful biological interpretability and highlighting the great potential of the proposed HDLFCA model in the identification of valid neuroimaging biomarkers.
35305256|a|PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Environmental chemicals and toxins have been associated with increased risk of impaired neurodevelopment and specific conditions like autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Prenatal diet is an individually modifiable factor that may alter associations with such environmental factors. The purpose of this review is to summarize studies examining prenatal dietary factors as potential modifiers of the relationship between environmental exposures and ASD or related neurodevelopmental outcomes. RECENT FINDINGS: Twelve studies were identified; five examined ASD diagnosis or ASD-related traits as the outcome (age at assessment range: 2-5 years) while the remainder addressed associations with neurodevelopmental scores (age at assessment range: 6 months to 6 years). Most studies focused on folic acid, prenatal vitamins, or omega-3 fatty acids as potentially beneficial effect modifiers. Environmental risk factors examined included air pollutants, endocrine disrupting chemicals, pesticides, and heavy metals. Most studies took place in North America. In 10/12 studies, the prenatal dietary factor under study was identified as a significant modifier, generally attenuating the association between the environmental exposure and ASD or neurodevelopment. Prenatal diet may be a promising target to mitigate adverse effects of environmental exposures on neurodevelopmental outcomes. Further research focused on joint effects is needed that encompasses a broader variety of dietary factors, guided by our understanding of mechanisms linking environmental exposures with neurodevelopment. Future studies should also aim to include diverse populations, utilize advanced methods to optimize detection of novel joint effects, incorporate consideration of timing, and consider both synergistic and antagonistic potential of diet.
35304979|a|Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by loss-of-function mutations in the maternal copy of the UBE3A gene. AS is characterized by intellectual disability, impaired speech and motor skills, epilepsy, and sleep disruptions. Multiple treatment strategies to re-express functional neuronal UBE3A from the dormant paternal allele were successful in rodent models of AS and have now moved to early phase clinical trials in children. Developing reliable and objective AS biomarkers is essential to guide the design and execution of current and future clinical trials. Our prior work quantified short daytime electroencephalograms (EEGs) to define promising biomarkers for AS. Here, we asked whether overnight sleep is better suited to detect AS EEG biomarkers. We retrospectively analyzed EEGs from 12 overnight sleep studies from individuals with AS with age and sex-matched Down syndrome and neurotypical controls, focusing on low frequency (2-4 Hz) delta rhythms and sleep spindles. Delta EEG rhythms were increased in individuals with AS during all stages of overnight sleep, but overnight sleep did not provide additional benefit over wake in the ability to detect increased delta. Abnormal sleep spindles were not reliably detected in EEGs from individuals with AS during overnight sleep, suggesting that delta rhythms represent a more reliable biomarker. Overall, we conclude that periods of wakefulness are sufficient, and perhaps ideal, to quantify delta EEG rhythms for use as AS biomarkers. LAY SUMMARY: Electroencephalography (EEG) is a safe and reliable way of measuring abnormal brain activity in Angelman syndrome. We found that low-frequency "delta" EEG rhythms are increased in individuals with Angelman syndrome during all stages of overnight sleep. Delta rhythms can be used as a tool to measure improvement in future clinical trials.
35304664|a|Adult siblings are potentially important sources of care, support, advocacy, and friendship for their brothers and sisters with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD). Drawing on data about 851 adult siblings who completed an online national survey, we examined predictors and potential key moderators of siblings' mental distress, wellbeing, quality of life, and health outcomes. Moderated regression analyses indicated that siblings experiencing higher levels of subjective poverty; siblings with brothers and sisters with lower levels of independence; and siblings who are carers and also experiencing low levels of subjective poverty, had worse outcomes and may be in need of specific supports. Compared to normative samples, adult siblings of people with IDD had worse outcomes across the measures.
35304663|a|Autistic individuals with intellectual disability who speak few or no words are at high risk of anxiety but are underrepresented in research. This study aimed to describe the presentation of anxiety in this population and discuss implications for the development of assessments. Interviews were conducted with 21 parents/carers of autistic individuals and nine clinicians. Data were analysed using content analysis and interpretative phenomenological analysis. Anxiety behaviours described by parents/carers included increased vocalisation, avoidance and behaviours that challenge. Changes to routine were highlighted as triggering anxiety. Clinicians discussed the importance of identifying an individual's baseline of behaviour, knowing an individual well and ruling out other forms of distress. This study raises considerations for early identification of anxiety and for subsequent support.
35304645|a|A comprehensive review of the economic evidence on parenting interventions targeting different aspects of child health is lacking to support decision-making. The aim of this review is to provide an up to date synthesis of the available health economic evidence for parenting interventions aiming to improve child health. A systematic review was conducted with articles identified through Econlit, Medline, PsychINFO, and ERIC databases. Only full economic evaluations comparing two or more options, considering both costs and outcomes were included. We assessed the quality of the studies using the Drummond checklist. We identified 44 studies of varying quality that met inclusion criteria; 22 targeting externalizing behaviors, five targeting internalizing problems, and five targeting other mental health problems including autism and alcohol abuse. The remaining studies targeted child abuse (n = 5), obesity (n = 3), and general health (n = 4). Studies varied considerably and many suffered from methodological limitations, such as limited costing perspectives, challenges with outcome measurement and short-time horizons. Parenting interventions showed good value for money in particular for preventing child externalizing and internalizing behaviors. For the prevention of child abuse, some programs had the potential of being cost-saving over the longer-term. Interventions were not cost-effective for the treatment of autism and obesity. Future research should include a broader spectrum of societal costs and quality-of-life impacts on both children and their caregivers.
35304234|a|BACKGROUND: Individuals with subclinical autistic traits exhibit a pattern of eye avoidance similar to that of typical autism. Our study aimed to test the efficacy of group cognitive behavioral therapy (G-CBT) in promoting gaze toward the eye area of facial expressions, specifically orienting to emotional faces, in individuals with high autistic traits (high AT). METHODS: Twenty-six high AT individuals and 30 low AT individuals participated. High AT individuals were assigned to eight sessions of G-CBT intervention. Eye-tracking measurements were acquired before and after treatment. RESULTS: We observed the following: (a) the eye avoidance in high AT individuals was prominent for all facial expressions in relative to low AT individuals; (b) G-CBT primarily improved gaze toward the eyes of happy and fearful faces but not for neutral face expressions in high AT individuals; (c) after 8 sessions of G-CBT, the fixation time on the eyes of emotional faces improved significantly. For happy faces, the fixation time on the eyes of faces was markedly increased in epochs between 500 ms and 1000 ms after the face onset; for fearful faces, the improvement in participants existed between about 1000 ms and 1500 ms after the face appeared. LIMITATION: Our results may not be generalized to other patients with ASD. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that G-CBT significantly promotes gaze toward the eyes of emotional faces in high AT individuals. These results are encouraging, and suggest that the emotional face processing in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) might stand to benefit from similar psychotherapeutic treatment.
35303947|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by a dyad of behavioural symptoms-social and communication deficits and repetitive behaviours. Multiple aetiological genetic and environmental factors have been identified as causing or increasing the likelihood of ASD, including serum zinc deficiency. Our previous studies revealed that dietary zinc supplementation can normalise impaired social behaviours, excessive grooming, and heightened anxiety in a Shank3 mouse model of ASD, as well as the amelioration of synapse dysfunction. Here, we have examined the efficacy and breadth of dietary zinc supplementation as an effective therapeutic strategy utilising a non-Shank-related mouse model of ASD-mice with Tbr1 haploinsufficiency. METHODS: We performed behavioural assays, amygdalar slice whole-cell patch-clamp electrophysiology, and immunohistochemistry to characterise the synaptic mechanisms underlying the ASD-associated behavioural deficits observed in Tbr1+/- mice and the therapeutic potential of dietary zinc supplementation. Two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Sidak's post hoc test and one-way ANOVA with Tukey's post hoc multiple comparisons were performed for statistical analysis. RESULTS: Our data show that dietary zinc supplementation prevents impairments in auditory fear memory and social interaction, but not social novelty, in the Tbr1+/- mice. Tbr1 haploinsufficiency did not induce excessive grooming nor elevate anxiety in mice. At the synaptic level, dietary zinc supplementation reversed alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor (AMPAR) and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) hypofunction and normalised presynaptic function at thalamic-lateral amygdala (LA) synapses that are crucial for auditory fear memory. In addition, the zinc supplemented diet significantly restored the synaptic puncta density of the GluN1 subunit essential for functional NMDARs as well as SHANK3 expression in both the basal and lateral amygdala (BLA) of Tbr1+/- mice. LIMITATIONS: The therapeutic effect of dietary zinc supplementation observed in rodent models may not reproduce the same effects in human patients. The effect of dietary zinc supplementation on synaptic function in other brain structures affected by Tbr1 haploinsufficiency including olfactory bulb and anterior commissure will also need to be examined. CONCLUSIONS: Our data further the understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the effect of dietary zinc supplementation and verify the efficacy and breadth of its application as a potential treatment strategy for ASD.
35303870|a|BACKGROUND: While family caregivers provide 70-90% of care for people living in the community and assist with 10-30% of the care in congregate living, most healthcare providers do not meaningfully involve family caregivers as partners in care. Recent research recommends that the healthcare workforce receive competency-based education to identify, assess, support, and partner with family caregivers across the care trajectory. OBJECTIVE: This paper reports a mixed-methods evaluation of a person-centered competency-based education program on Caregiver-Centered Care for the healthcare workforce. METHODS: This foundational education was designed for all healthcare providers and trainees who work with family caregivers and is offered free online (caregivercare.ca). Healthcare providers from five healthcare settings (primary, acute, home, supportive living, long-term care) and trainees in medicine, nursing, and allied health were recruited via email and social media. We used the Kirkpatrick-Barr health workforce training evaluation framework to evaluate the education program, measuring various healthcare providers' learner satisfaction with the content (Level 1), pre-post changes in knowledge and confidence when working with family caregivers (Level 2), and changes in behaviors in practice (Level 3). RESULTS: Participants were primarily healthcare employees (68.9%) and trainees (21.7%) and represented 5 healthcare settings. Evaluation of the first 161 learners completing the program indicated that on a 5-point Likert scale, the majority were satisfied with the overall quality of the education (Mean(M) = 4.69; SD = .60). Paired T-tests indicated that out of a score of 50, post-education changes in knowledge and confidence to work with family caregivers was significantly higher than pre-education scores (pre M = 38.90, SD = 6.90; post M = 46.60, SD = 4.10; t(150) = - 16.75, p < .0001). Qualitative results derived from open responses echoed the quantitative findings in satisfaction with the education delivery as well as improvements in learners' knowledge and confidence. CONCLUSION: Health workforce education to provide person-centered care to all family caregivers is an innovative approach to addressing the current inconsistent system of supports for family caregivers. The education program evaluated here was effective at increasing self-reported knowledge and confidence to work with family caregivers.
35303748|a|Characteristics of interpersonal motor synchrony in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have been investigated only in older children and adolescents, which calls for investigations in younger samples. The interpersonal motor synchrony was compared between preschool-aged children with (n = 23) and without ASD (n = 24) during free plays with familiar teachers. Children with ASD exhibited reduced synchrony of the upper body and trunk compared with typically developing (TD) children. Moreover, the degree of synchrony in ASD group was not above than chance. For autistic children, interpersonal motor synchrony was negatively correlated with aspects of autistic traits. The results suggest that the impairment of interpersonal motor synchrony has an onset earlier than school age and is a potential pathway for understanding autistic traits.
35303620|a|BACKGROUND: Abnormalities on electroencephalography (EEG) results have been reported in a high percentage of children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). The purpose of this study was to explore the prevalence of EEG abnormalities in a clinical population of pre-school children with Autism Spectrum Disorder and the differences in terms of the following phenotypic characteristics: adaptive behavior, executive functioning, severity of Autism Spectrum Disorder core symptoms, and comorbidity symptoms. METHODS: A cross-sectional analysis of 69 children who attended the Autism Spectrum Disorder early diagnosis program with electroencephalography and clinical diagnosis was performed. A battery of questionnaires was also made to parents to evaluate emotions, behavior, and functional skills for daily living. RESULTS: Out of 69 pre-school children with Autism Spectrum Disorder, twenty nine (42%) had abnormalities in electroencephalography results. The group with abnormal epileptiform electroencephalography exhibited more impairment in executive functioning and social-relationship coexisting symptoms. CONCLUSIONS: The presence of an abnormal epileptiform electroencephalography in pre-school children with ASD already suggests a worse development in clinical features.
35303589|a|BACKGROUND: Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) encompasses several rare genetic disorders characterized by progressive lower extremity spasticity and weakness caused by corticospinal tract degeneration. Published literature on genetically confirmed pediatric HSP cases is limited. METHODS: We conducted a retrospective review of childhood-onset HSP cases followed in the neuromuscular clinics at Children's and Emory Healthcare in Atlanta. Clinical presentation, family history, examination, electrodiagnostic data, neuroimaging, genetic test results, comorbidities, and treatment were recorded. RESULTS: Sixteen patients with HSP (eight males, eight females) with a mean age 19 years +- 15.7 years were included. Ten patients (66%) presented with gait difficulty. Seven (44%) were ambulatory at the last clinic follow-up visit with an average disease duration of 7.4 years. Genetically confirmed etiologies included SPAST (3 patients), MARS (2), KIF1A (2), KIF5A (1), SACS (1), SPG7 (1), REEP1 (1), PNPT1 (1), MT-ATP6 (1), and ATL1 (1). Symptom onset to genetic confirmation on an average was 8.2 years. Sensory motor axonal polyneuropathy was found in seven patients, and two exhibited cerebellar atrophy on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain. Neurological comorbidities included developmental delay (n = 9), autism (n = 5), epilepsy (n = 3), and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (n = 2). CONCLUSIONS: In our study, a significant proportion (70%) of subjects with childhood-onset HSP had comorbid neurocognitive deficits, polyneuropathy with or without neuroimaging abnormalities, and rare genetic etiology. Genetic diagnosis was established either through inherited genetic neuropathy panel or whole-exome sequencing, which supports the utility of whole-exome sequencing in aiding in HSP diagnosis.
35303380|a|BACKGROUND: Support, such as information, advice and therapies, can play a vital role in the lives of families of autistic children. However, little is known about the support experiences of UK parents and carers. AIM: To explore experiences of and access to support for families of children with autism and sensory processing difficulties, from the perspective of parents and carers. METHODS: Semi-structured, timeline-assisted interviews were conducted with parents/carers of 30 children aged 5-11, exploring experiences of support. Framework analysis was used to identify themes in the interview data. RESULTS: Support varied widely and was not accessed equitably. Specialist autism support, together with support from other parents and voluntary organizations, was perceived as more useful than statutory and nonspecialist provision. Unmet support needs included an ongoing point of contact for information and advice for parents, and access to direct therapy and specialist mental health provision for children. CONCLUSIONS: Findings emphasize the need for a clear pathway of support following autism diagnosis, autism-specific training for professional service providers and specialist provision tailored to the needs of autistic children. PATIENT OR PUBLIC CONTRIBUTION: An advisory group of four parents of children with autism provided feedback on study procedures and materials, including participant information sheets and timeline completion instructions.
35302877|a|PURPOSE: This scoping review maps research in parent-mediated autism spectrum disorder interventions culturally adapted for Latin American populations, to provide an overview of the available evidence across perspectives and disciplines and to identify gaps in the research knowledge base. METHOD: A systematic search for relevant articles was conducted using six databases and archival and forward hand searches of articles that met inclusion criteria. Titles and abstracts were reviewed by three authors, followed by full-text reviews of remaining articles. Twenty-one articles met inclusion criteria and were retained for data extraction. The ecological validity framework was used to frame data analysis and results. RESULTS: In total, 19 studies described unique implementations of 16 different interventions, which spanned 21 articles, representing a range of study designs and implementing a variety of adaptations. Most adaptations consisted of surface-structure changes, spanning the dimensions of language, concepts, methods, context, and persons. Few articles were identified that described international studies or studies examining direct parent-mediated strategies with large sample sizes and strong methodological designs. CONCLUSIONS: Several intervention adaptations that have potential for clinical utility are presented. Clinicians working with Latin American families are encouraged to discuss potential adaptations openly with families before choosing and implementing specific strategies.
35302292|a|Gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms are one of the prevalent co-occurring issues in autism spectrum disorder (ASD), though the range of symptom frequency estimates varies dramatically across studies, which can limit the further research of GI issues in ASD as well as potential treatment strategies. The wide range of prevalence estimates is partly due to the lack of standardized, validated measures of GI symptoms among people with ASD. The goal of this study was to (1) develop a measure, which included non-verbal and mealtime behaviors, to assess for GI symptoms and (2) evaluate its psychometric characteristics. This was accomplished by drawing on two existing tools, Autism Treatment Network Gastrointestinal Inventory and the Brief Autism Mealtime Behavior Inventory, and deriving new items, to create the "ASD Gastrointestinal and Related Behaviors Inventory" (ASD-GIRBI). The ASD-GIRBI was piloted in an online registry of families with a child with ASD. A psychometric analysis was carried out in a sample of 334 children aged 6-17 years with ASD, resulting in a 36-item tool. The Cronbach's alpha for the overall scale was 0.88. Exploratory factor analysis identified a seven-factor model (1. Bowel movement pain; 2. Aggressive or disruptive during mealtimes; 3. Particular with foods; 4. Abdominal pain and upset stomach; 5. Refusing food; 6. Constipation and encopresis; 7. Motor or other behaviors). Following validation in an independent sample with clinical evaluation of GI symptoms, this tool will be helpful for both research and clinical purposes.
35302087|a|Recent data has revealed dissociations between social and non-social skills in both autistic and neurotypical populations. In the present study, we investigated whether specific visuospatial abilities, such as figure disembedding and mental rotation, are differently related to social and non-social autistic traits, in neurotypical women and men. University students (N = 426) completed the Autism Spectrum Quotient (AQ), figure disembedding and mental rotation of two-dimensional figures tasks. AQ social skills (AQ-social) and attention-to-details (AQ-attention) subscales were used as measures of social and non-social autistic traits, respectively. Mental rotation was affected by a significant interaction between sex, social and non-social traits. When non-social traits were above the mean (+ 1 SD), no sex differences in mental rotation were found. Instead, below this value, sex differences depended on the social traits, with men on average outperforming women at middle-to-high social traits, and with a comparable performance, and with women on average outperforming men, at lower social traits. A small positive correlation between figure disembedding and social traits was observed in the overall sample. These results are interpreted in terms of the hyper-systemizing theory of autism and contribute to the evidence of individual differences in the cognitive style of autistic people and neurotypical people with autistic traits.
35301925|a|Starting in Vienna in the 1920s, Anna Freud's first tentative attempts at observing children became a crucial component of the "double approach" which integrated direct child observation with psychoanalytic reconstruction. This enabled the detailed study of unfolding developmental processes and the construction of a theory of normative as well as pathological child development. Her identification of disturbances that were developmental rather than neurotic led to the broadening of child analysis. Interventions aimed at freeing and supporting development rather giving insight, became known as "developmental therapy".These interventions are used in the parent-toddler groups that embody Anna Freud's endeavour to link psychoanalytic theory, direct observation and clinical practice. Observations of a toddler who attended a psychotherapeutic parent-toddler group with his mother, show how intervening early in the child's life and soon after concerns were identified, contributed to preventing maladaptive affective states and ways of relating from becoming entrenched.
35301876|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Expert recommendations for toddlers who are likely to develop autism include caregivers being actively involved in the services children receive. However, many services available in the community may not follow these recommendations. Evidence suggests that an intervention named Project ImPACT for Toddlers demonstrates positive parent and child outcomes for families in the community. Project ImPACT for Toddlers was designed specifically for toddlers by a group of parents, clinicians, researchers, and funders. It teaches parents of young children strategies to support their child's development in daily routines. This study reports the perspectives of early intervention providers who learned to use Project ImPACT for Toddlers on whether the intervention was a good fit for their practice and easy to use. The study also examines how many agencies are using Project ImPACT for Toddlers and how many families have received the intervention in the community. The goal of the study is to inform the continued use of Project ImPACT for Toddlers in the community and support offering the intervention in other regions. Participants include 38 community providers who participated in a training study of Project ImPACT for Toddlers and completed a survey and semi-structured interview after approximately 3 months of using Project ImPACT for Toddlers with families. Participants perceived the training model as acceptable and appropriate, and identified the group-based model of training, comprehensive materials, and agency support as strengths of the approach. Survey findings complemented the results from the interviews. Data indicate an increasing number of agencies and families accessing Project ImPACT for Toddlers. Efforts to expand evidence-based intervention in early intervention should continue to build upon the model used for Project ImPACT for Toddlers.
35301737|a|BACKGROUND: Atypical feeding behaviours such as significantly limited food preferences, hypersensitivity to food textures or temperatures and pocketing food without swallowing are common concerns in child health. Current reports indicate an inter-relationship between early growth, feeding problems and developmental disorders, yet little is known about how these behaviours develop in early childhood. There is also a lack of consensus about clinical definitions for atypical feeding behaviours, diagnostic thresholds, and the associated precursors. To date, there has been no synthesis of the extant literature about factors associated with the early onset of atypical feeding behaviours in young children. OBJECTIVE: This scoping review aimed to characterise the factors associated with the early emergence of atypical feeding behaviours in typically developing young children. METHODS: CINAHL, MEDLINE, PsycINFO and Scopus databases were searched. Studies published in the last five years were included if they examined factors associated with the development of atypical eating behaviours in infants and young children. Of the 2137 records obtained after the search strategy was applied, 202 full-text articles were retrieved for a more detailed examination and to ensure they met the inclusion criteria. This resulted in 54 studies being included in this scoping review. RESULTS: Of the 54 studies, three studies analysed precursors responsible for atypical feeding behaviours, and 51 studies discussed the factors associated with the early emergence of feeding difficulties. Multiple factors, including genetic factors, breastfeeding, late introduction of solids and lumpy foods, complementary feeding techniques, parental mental health, prematurity, and child factors including temperament, were identified. There is inconsistent evidence for the associations between breastfeeding exposure and feeding difficulties. CONCLUSIONS: This study identified multiple factors potentially associated with the early onset of atypical feeding behaviours in young children; however, there is insufficient evidence at this time to support specific recommendations for early feeding practices in young children. More methodologically rigorous studies are needed to extend these findings.
35301519|a|IMPORTANCE: Recent years have seen a shift to strengths-based approaches promoting self-determination and career-related interests among autistic youth. Research is needed to understand the career-related goals set by autistic youth on the basis of their interests. OBJECTIVE: To descriptively explore the career design goals set by autistic youth engaged in the self-determined career design model (SDCDM) intervention. DESIGN: Content analysis was used to analyze the types of goals set by youth during intervention. Two researchers separately reviewed the goal set by each autistic youth (one goal per youth) and determined categories for each goal. SETTING: Preferred community location (usually the youth's home) in an urban Midwestern city. PARTICIPANTS: Twenty-one autistic youth. INTERVENTION: SDCDM. OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Participants set goals as part of the SDCDM, which were recorded using Goal Attainment Scaling (GAS). Researchers used GAS to support each participant in setting a measurable and objective goal and describing criteria for meeting the goal. RESULTS: Categories included enhancing self-management, obtaining employment, exploring career opportunities, enhancing learning, and enhancing self-advocacy. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The findings from this study indicate that autistic youth set goals related to obtaining employment and enhancing generalizable 21st-century skills, such as self-advocacy and self-management. What This Article Adds: The SDCDM is a tool occupational therapy practitioners can use to support youth in setting and working toward career goals.
35301265|a|Genetic studies of complex disorders such as autism and intellectual disability (ID) are often based on enrichment of individual rare variants or their aggregate burden in affected individuals compared to controls. However, these studies overlook the influence of combinations of rare variants that may not be deleterious on their own due to statistical challenges resulting from rarity and combinatorial explosion when enumerating variant combinations, limiting our ability to study oligogenic basis for these disorders. Here, we present RareComb, a framework that combines the apriori algorithm and statistical inference to identify specific combinations of mutated genes associated with complex phenotypes. RareComb overcomes computational barriers and exhaustively evaluates variant combinations to identify nonadditive relationships between simultaneously mutated genes. Using RareComb, we analyzed 6,189 individuals with autism and identified 718 combinations significantly associated with ID, and carriers of these combinations showed lower IQ than expected in an independent cohort of 1,878 individuals. These combinations were enriched for nervous system genes such as NIN and NGF, showed complex inheritance patterns, and were depleted in unaffected siblings. We found that an affected individual can carry many oligogenic combinations, each contributing to the same phenotype or distinct phenotypes at varying effect sizes. We also used this framework to identify combinations associated with multiple comorbid phenotypes, including mutations of COL28A1 and MFSD2B for ID and schizophrenia and ABCA4, DNAH10 and MC1R for ID and anxiety/depression. Our framework identifies a key component of missing heritability and provides a novel paradigm to untangle the genetic architecture of complex disorders.
35301207|a|OBJECTIVE: Investigate predictors of adverse outcome in children with and without attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) combined with developmental coordination disorder (DCD) at 6 years of age. DESIGN: Prospective population-based cohort study. SETTING: Western Sweden. PARTICIPANTS: From a screening-based population cohort of 589 individuals, 62 (11 female) diagnosed with ADHD+DCD at mean age 6.6 years, and a comparison group of 51 population-matched (10 female) children were followed prospectively. OUTCOME MEASURES: Drawn from a clinical reassessment at age 9 years of 110 of the 113 individuals, neuropsychiatric symptoms, continuous performance test results and measures of motor function were used as predictors of outcome in linear regression models. Participants were followed in national registers up to 30-31 years of age for outcomes in adulthood. Predictors were regressed onto an adverse outcome score (range 0-7) comprising seven binary endpoints, and when applicable onto each continuous outcome separately (low educational attainment, low occupation level, psychiatric disorder, psychotropic medication prescription, sick pension, high dependence on social benefits and criminal conviction). RESULTS: Of the 110 individuals, 3 had died. In univariable regression onto the adverse outcome score, the strongest predictors at age 9 years were symptoms of conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, ADHD and motor dysfunction, with an R2 around 25%, followed by autistic traits (R2=15%) and depressive symptoms (R2=8%). Combining these six strongest predictors in a multivariable model yielded an adjusted R2=38%. Subgroup analyses were similar, except for a strong association of autistic traits with the adverse outcome score in females (n=20, R2=50%). CONCLUSION: Several neurodevelopmental symptoms, including ADHD severity at age 9 years, accounted for a considerable amount of the variance in terms of adulthood adverse outcome. Broad neurodevelopmental profiling irrespective of diagnostic thresholds should inform research and clinical practice. The study highlights the importance of considering associated comorbidities and problems in ADHD.
35301122|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) affects ~2% of the population in the US, and monogenic forms of ASD often result in the most severe manifestation of the disorder. Recently, SCN2A has emerged as a leading gene associated with ASD, of which abnormal sleep pattern is a common comorbidity. SCN2A encodes the voltage-gated sodium channel NaV1.2. Predominantly expressed in the brain, NaV1.2 mediates the action potential firing of neurons. Clinical studies found that a large portion of children with SCN2A deficiency have sleep disorders, which severely impact the quality of life of affected individuals and their caregivers. The underlying mechanism of sleep disturbances related to NaV1.2 deficiency, however, is not known. Using a gene-trap Scn2a-deficient mouse model (Scn2atrap), we found that Scn2a deficiency results in increased wakefulness and reduced non-rapid-eye-movement (NREM) sleep. Brain region-specific Scn2a deficiency in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) containing region, which is involved in circadian rhythms, partially recapitulates the sleep disturbance phenotypes. At the cellular level, we found that Scn2a deficiency disrupted the firing pattern of spontaneously firing neurons in the SCN region. At the molecular level, RNA-sequencing analysis revealed differentially expressed genes in the circadian entrainment pathway including core clock genes Per1 and Per2. Performing a transcriptome-based compound discovery, we identified dexanabinol (HU-211), a putative glutamate receptor modulator, that can partially reverse the sleep disturbance in mice. Overall, our study reveals possible molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying Scn2a deficiency-related sleep disturbances, which may inform the development of potential pharmacogenetic interventions for the affected individuals.
35301067|a|Resurgence refers to a behavioral process in which a recent response is extinguished (or reinforcement conditions worsen) and a previously extinguished response recurs. In previous research, resurgence has been reliably produced when the resurgence procedure is repeated. Changes in the degree of increase of the resurging response across iterations of the procedure have been inconsistent, however, with some studies showing increases and some showing no changes or decreases in resurgence magnitude. The present study examined the nature of resurgence across repeated iterations of the conventional resurgence procedure by exposing four pigeons to the resurgence procedure six times in succession. In the first condition of the resurgence procedure, pecks on one key (e.g., the left) were reinforced under a variable-interval (VI) 30-s schedule. In the second condition pecks on that key were extinguished, and pecks on another key (e.g., the right) were reinforced under the same schedule. In the final condition there were no programmed consequences for either response. Resurgence was observed in 21 of 24 opportunities (87.5%). Iteration-over-iteration increases in resurgence were observed in 15 of 20 opportunities (75.0%), and this increase was found to be statistically significant. These findings demonstrate that, under certain conditions, resurgence generally increases in magnitude with repeated exposure to the procedures that generate it.
35301021|a|OBJECTIVES: To evaluate temporal changes in pediatric emergency department (ED) visits for mental health problems in Massachusetts based on diagnoses and patient characteristics and to assess trends in all-cause pediatric ED visits. STUDY DESIGN: This statewide, population-based retrospective cohort study used the Massachusetts All-Payer Claims Database, which includes almost all Massachusetts residents. The study sample consisted of residents under age 21 who were enrolled in a health plan from 2013-2017. Using multivariate regressions, we examined temporal trends in mental health-related and all-cause ED visits from 2013-2017, with person-quarter as the unit of analysis; we also estimated differential trends by sociodemographic and diagnostic subgroups. The outcomes were number of mental health-related (any diagnosis, plus 14 individual diagnoses) and all-cause ED visits/1000 patients/quarter. RESULTS: Of the 967,590 Massachusetts residents in our study (14.8 million person-quarters), mean age was 8.1 years, 48% were female, and 57% had Medicaid coverage. For this population, mental health (any) and all-cause ED visits decreased from 2013-2017 (p<0.001). Those 18-21 years experienced the largest declines in mental health-related (63.0% decrease) and all-cause (60.9% decrease) ED visits. Although mental health ED visits declined across most diagnostic subgroups, ED visits with autism spectrum disorder and suicidal-related diagnoses increased by 108% and 44%, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Overall rates of pediatric ED visits with mental health diagnoses in Massachusetts declined from 2013 to 2017, although ED visits with autism- and suicide-related diagnoses increased. Massachusetts' policies and care delivery models aimed at pediatric mental health may hold promise, although there are important opportunities for improvement.
35300604|a|BACKGROUND: Diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is generally made phenotypically and the hunt for ASD-biomarkers continues. The purpose of this study was to compare urine organic acids profiles of ASD versus typically developing (TD) children to identify potential biomarkers for diagnosis and exploration of ASD etiology. METHODS: This case control study was performed in the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine in collaboration with the Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Aga Khan University, Pakistan. Midstream urine was collected in the first half of the day time before noon from the children with ASD diagnosed by a pediatric neurologist based on DSM-5 criteria and TD healthy controls from August 2019 to June 2021. The urine organic acids were analyzed by Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry. To identify potential biomarkers for ASD canonical linear discriminant analysis was carried out for the organic acids, quantified in comparison to an internal standard. RESULTS: A total of 85 subjects were enrolled in the current study. The mean age of the ASD (n = 65) and TD groups (n = 20) was 4.5 +- 2.3 and 6.4 +- 2.2 years respectively with 72.3% males in the ASD group and 50% males in the TD group. Parental consanguinity was 47.7 and 30% in ASD and TD groups, respectively. The common clinical signs noted in children with ASD were developmental delay (70.8%), delayed language skills (66.2%), and inability to articulate sentences (56.9%). Discriminant analysis showed that 3-hydroxyisovalericc, homovanillic acid, adipic acid, suberic acid, and indole acetic were significantly different between ASD and TD groups. The biochemical classification results reveal that 88.2% of cases were classified correctly into ASD& TD groups based on the urine organic acid profiles. CONCLUSION: 3-hydroxy isovaleric acid, homovanillic acid, adipic acid, suberic acid, and indole acetic were good discriminators between the two groups. The discovered potential biomarkers could be valuable for future research in children with ASD.
35299821|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a type of neurodevelopmental disorder that has been diagnosed in an increasing number of children around the world. Existing data suggest that early diagnosis and intervention can improve ASD outcomes. However, the causes of ASD remain complex and unclear, and there are currently no clinical biomarkers for autism spectrum disorder. More mechanisms and biomarkers of autism have been found with the development of advanced technology such as mass spectrometry. Many recent studies have found a link between ASD and elevated oxidative stress, which may play a role in its development. ASD is caused by oxidative stress in several ways, including protein post-translational changes (e.g., carbonylation), abnormal metabolism (e.g., lipid peroxidation), and toxic buildup [e.g., reactive oxygen species (ROS)]. To detect elevated oxidative stress in ASD, various biomarkers have been developed and employed. This article summarizes recent studies about the mechanisms and biomarkers of oxidative stress. Potential biomarkers identified in this study could be used for early diagnosis and evaluation of ASD intervention, as well as to inform and target ASD pharmacological or nutritional treatment interventions.
35299617|a|Kenya is the leading camel milk producer globally, with an annual production volume of 1.165 MMT, followed by Somalia (0.958 MMT) and Mali (0.271 MMT). In Kenya, pastoral tribes in North-Eastern parts rear about 4.722 million camels accounting for about 80% of all camels. Camels offer locals various benefits, including transportation of goods across the deserts, meat, fur, and milk. Camel milk contains natural therapeutically and immunity-boosting properties due to the higher concentration of lactoferrin, lactoglobulins, and lysozyme than bovine milk. Camel milk has been shown to have hypoallergenicity properties compared to bovine milk. Camel and human milk are similar in nutritional composition and therapeutic properties. Camel milk is known to fight various diseases, including cancer, diabetes, autism, hypertension, and skin diseases. Despite the standing of Kenya in the world in terms of camel milk production, Kenya lags considering the camel milk products, industries, and marketing. This paper reviews recent literature on camels and camel milk production trends in Kenya in relation to the world. The review also discusses various camel milk properties (nutritional and therapeutic) as well as the camel milk sector situation in Kenya.
35299077|a|The disruption of methionine (L-MET) metabolism has been linked with neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism and schizophrenia and neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disorder. We previously showed that repeated administration to adult mice of methionine produced impairments of cognitive deficits. Considering the decreased neurogenesis and increased molecular inflammation hypotheses of cognitive deficits in Alzheimer's, we aimed to explore whether the methionine regimen that produced cognitive deficits is associated with altered neuroinflammation, neurogenesis, or neurodegeneration. We found that repeated administration of L-MET at a dose equivalent to two-fold of daily dietary intake for seven days enhanced the activation of microglia and inflammation in the brain, and decreased neurogenesis in the hippocampus without affecting degeneration. Furthermore, sub-chronic and chronic L-MET treatment of human neuroblastoma (SH-SY5Y) inhibited cell cycle progression, an effect that was reversed by decreasing removing L-MET from the medium. These results support a role for neuroinflammation and neurogenesis in mediating the mechanism through which L-MET induces cognitive deficits. The results also uncover L-MET restriction, neuroinflammation, and neurogenesis as potential preventive and/or therapeutic targets for mental disorders associated with cognitive disorders, including schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease.
35298957|a|BACKGROUND: Families of children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) face ongoing challenges that can affect their family life. Helping those families cope with the impact of ASD and promote more positive family and child outcomes requires research to better understand the differential aspects of quality of life for those families. AIM: This article examined the quality of life of 77 families (n = 45 families with children with ASD aged 0-12 years old, and n = 32 families with other developmental disabilities). METHODS AND PROCEDURE: The Family Quality of Life Scale (FQOL) was applied. OUTCOMES AND RESULTS: The relationships between importance and satisfaction were analyzed, contrasting differences between families, and studying the influence of age. Results show the presence of common needs, as the higher ratings in importance versus satisfaction evidenced, but also specific and more evident needs in families of children with ASD, motivated by the differential characteristics of the disorder and their environment. Age was relevant to focus support on priority areas. CONCLUSION: The need to adapt to family individualities to promote their quality of life was concluded. IMPLICATIONS: Those findings reinforce the importance of bringing together theoretical knowledge and evaluation of professional practice as a framework for converting the latter into good practices and quality actions.
35298757|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) affects children and their families. We investigated the family environment of children with ASD in Brazil. Twenty-one families participated. Outcome measures administered to parents included the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire, Questionnaire on Resources and Stress-Short Form, and the Family Environment Scale. All families reported a number of difficulties, including social interactions and peer relationships, stress levels, and communication difficulties. Families also reported great concern for their child's future. Brazil is a developing country, yet there are few national resources and studies related to ASD. The challenges continue from diagnosis through treatment. Our results emphasize the need to understand the family environment of children with autism and their parents' apprehensions to develop effective coping programs.
35298756|a|Individuals on the autism spectrum often experience pragmatic social conversation difficulties that include showing interest in their conversational partners. This may become particularly evident during adolescence when conversation with peers is the primary medium for social interaction. This study used a multiple baseline design across participants to investigate the effects of a brief intervention package on the partner-focused conversation of three adolescents with autism. Results showed increased partner-focused questions and comments for all participants. Social validity assessments indicated that the intervention led to meaningful improvements in peer conversations.
35298755|a|Different atypical social interaction styles (SISs) were defined and tested in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Whether these styles can also be distinguished in adults with ASD has not yet been explored. In men with ASD, men with personality disorder (PD), and men from the general population (N = 90), aged 18-65 years, we tested which SISs can be distinguished and how they relate to the presence of PD traits. We found a significant distinction in allocation to atypical SISs between the three groups. This study shows the presence of atypical SISs in adults with ASD, and complements previous SIS findings in children and adolescents with ASD.Trial registration The Netherlands National Trial Register NTR6391. Registered 04 May 2017.
35298088|a|A previous study found that children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have better recall when they perform instructions (subject-performed task [SPT]) than when they passively hear instructions (verbal task [VT]) in a working memory task for instructions, an effect that is called the SPT effect. This study explored whether the SPT effect exhibited by ASD children is caused by the movement component or by processing materials twice. More importantly, this study explored whether intelligence influences the SPT effect exhibited by ASD children. ASD children with three levels of intelligence (N = 56) and a control group, children with intellectual disability (ID) who had low intelligence but did not have ASD (N = 21), were asked to perform working memory tasks for instructions under VT, SPT and repeated (hearing the instruction twice) conditions. No significant difference in performance was observed between the VT and repeated conditions, regardless of the child's level of intelligence. ASD children with lower-middle intelligence exhibited a smaller SPT effect than ASD children with upper-middle intelligence. Critically, while ASD children with low intelligence did not exhibit the SPT effect, an ID group with equivalent low intelligence did show this effect. Therefore, these results show that the SPT effect for ASD children is caused by the movement component and is uniquely associated with a certain level of intelligence, namely, lower middle and higher levels of intelligence. LAY SUMMARY: In ASD children, the benefit of physically performing instructions for working memory performance is uniquely associated with a certain level of intelligence. Only ASD children with lower-middle intelligence (and higher) benefit from physically performing instructions, and higher intelligence increases this benefit; ASD children with low intelligence do not show this benefit. This benefit in ASD children is attributed to the additional motoric code generated by physical performance.
35297964|a|Tissue identity determination is critical for regeneration, and the planarian anteroposterior (AP) axis uses positional control genes expressed from bodywall muscle to determine body regionalization. Canonical Wnt signaling establishes anterior versus posterior pole identities through notum and wnt1 signaling, and two Wnt/FGFRL signaling pathways control head and trunk domains, but their downstream signaling mechanisms are not fully understood. Here we identify a planarian Src homolog that restricts head and trunk identities to anterior positions. src-1(RNAi) animals formed enlarged brains and ectopic eyes and also duplicated trunk tissue, similar to a combination of Wnt/FGFRL RNAi phenotypes. src-1 was required for establishing territories of positional control gene expression, indicating it acts at an upstream step in patterning the AP axis. Double RNAi experiments and eye regeneration assays suggest src-1 can act in parallel to at least some Wnt and FGFRL factors. Co-inhibition of src-1 with other posterior-promoting factors led to dramatic patterning changes and a reprogramming of Wnt/FGFRLs into controlling new positional outputs. These results identify src-1 as a factor that promotes robustness of the AP positional system that instructs appropriate regeneration.
35297725|a|PURPOSE: There is evidence that childhood adversity is correlated with poor health outcomes across the lifespan. Resilience results when internal and external protective factors in childhood mitigate this relationship. However, among children on the autism spectrum, these relationships are understudied, and little is known about the characteristics and role of adversity and resilience in their in their lives. This study interprets these phenomena as experienced by autistic young adults. METHODS: Initially, we conducted community engagement with five members of the autism community who advised on the research question, research design, and analysis. Subsequently, four autistic young adults, three women and one non-binary, aged 19-27, were recruited to participate in semi-structured interviews via phone, video conference, and online chat. Credibility checking interviews followed data analysis. RESULTS: Through interpretative phenomenological analysis we identified themes related to the negative effects of adversity, including social disconnection, mental and emotional well-being, sense of self, and development into young adulthood. Resilience developed in places of refuge and identity and was evident in their transitions into young adulthood. CONCLUSION: These findings provide direction for decreasing adversity and fostering resilience in children and adolescents on the autism spectrum.
35297491|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a common neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by a core deficit in social processes. However, it is still unclear whether the core clinical symptoms of the disorder can be reflected by the temporal variability of resting-state network functional connectivity (FC). In this article, we examined the large-scale network FC temporal variability at the local region, within-network, and between-network levels using the fuzzy entropy technique. Then, we correlated the network FC temporal variability to social-related scores. We found that the social behavior correlated with the FC temporal variability of the precuneus, parietal, occipital, temporal, and precentral. Our results also showed that social behavior was significantly negatively correlated with the temporal variability of FC within the default mode network, between the frontoparietal network and cingulo-opercular task control network, and the dorsal attention network. In contrast, social behavior correlated significantly positively with the temporal variability of FC within the subcortical network. Finally, using temporal variability as a feature, we construct a model to predict the social score of ASD. These findings suggest that the network FC temporal variability has a close relationship with social behavioral inflexibility in ASD and may serve as a potential biomarker for predicting ASD symptom severity.
35297186|a|Atypical sensory processing occurs in up to 97% of children on the autism spectrum. Children who are on the autism spectrum also commonly demonstrate challenging behaviors, and their caregivers report increased levels of strain in daily life. The aim of this study was to explore four sensory processing features; seeking, avoiding, sensitivity, and registration, and their relationships with maladaptive behaviors in children with autism, as well as with caregiver strain. Participants comprised 75 children with autism aged 7-12 years (M = 7.81). Caregivers completed three questionnaire measures examining child sensory processing, maladaptive behaviors, and perceptions of caregiver strain. We found avoiding significantly associated with irritability. Avoiding also displayed the strongest relationship with global caregiver strain. Avoiding and seeking were strongly related to hyperactivity/noncompliance (components of maladaptive behavior). A multiple regression was performed to explore how atypical sensory processing features and maladaptive behaviors together predicted caregiver strain. Together, maladaptive behaviors and sensory features accounted for 58% of the variance in total caregiver strain. The only significant individual predictor of total caregiver strain was sensory avoiding, which uniquely accounted for 5.76% of the variation. The findings suggest that atypical sensory processing is associated with overall caregiver strain, above that explained by maladaptive behaviors. Implications for targeted support for the benefit of the child, parents and family unit are discussed. LAY SUMMARY: Children who are on the autism spectrum often have differences in sensory processing. These children also tend to show challenging behaviors, and their caregivers can experience increased stress. This study looked at how sensory processing difficulties relate to such behaviors and caregiver stress. We found that both sensory processing and challenging behaviors were related to the amount of stress caregivers felt. This suggests that interventions may benefit from looking at sensory processing features when considering how to help reduce challenging behaviors and caregiver stress.
35297118|a|BACKGROUND: 3q29 deletion syndrome is associated with mild to moderate intellectual disability as well as comorbid psychopathology such as ADHD, anxiety, ASD and schizophrenia. A greater understanding of specific profiles that could increase risk for psychopathology is necessary in order to best understand and support individuals with 3q29 deletion syndrome. The goal of this study was to thus carefully outline the strengths and weaknesses of these individuals. A second goal was to ask whether the cognitive impact of the deletion predicted psychopathology in other domains. METHODS: We systematically evaluated cognitive ability, adaptive behaviour and psychopathology in 32 individuals with the canonical 3q29 deletion using gold-standard instruments and a standardised phenotyping protocol. RESULTS: Mean full scale IQ was 73 (range 40-99). Verbal subtest score (mean 80, range 31-106) was slightly higher and had a greater range than non-verbal subtest score (mean 75, range 53-98). Spatial ability was evaluated in a subset (n = 24) and was lower than verbal and non-verbal ability (mean 71, range 34-108). There was an average 14-point difference between verbal and non-verbal subset scores; 60% of the time the verbal subset score was higher than the non-verbal subset score. Study subjects with a verbal ability subtest score lower than the non-verbal subtest score were four times more likely to have a diagnosis of intellectual disability (suggestive, P value 0.07). The age at which a child first spoke two-word phrases was strongly associated with measures of verbal ability (P value 2.56e-07). Cognitive ability was correlated with adaptive behaviour measures (correlation 0.42, P value 0.02). However, although group means found equivalent scores, there was, on average, a 10-point gap between these skills (range -33 to 33), in either direction, in about 50% of the sample, suggesting that cognitive measures only partially inform adaptive ability. Cognitive ability scores did not have any significant relationship to cumulative burden of psychopathology nor to individual neurodevelopmental or psychiatric diagnoses. CONCLUSIONS: Individuals with 3q29 deletion syndrome have a complex pattern of cognitive disability. Two-thirds of individuals with the deletion will exhibit significant strength in verbal ability; this may mask deficits in non-verbal reasoning, leading to an overestimation of overall ability. Deficits in verbal ability may be the driver of intellectual disability diagnosis. Cognitive ability is not a strong indicator of other neurodevelopmental or psychiatric impairment; thus, individuals with 3q29 deletion syndrome who exhibit IQ scores within the normal range should receive all recommended behavioural evaluations.
35296811|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental impairment characterized by deficits in social interaction skills, impaired communication, and repetitive and restricted behaviors that are thought to be due to altered neurotransmission processes. The amino acid glutamate is an essential excitatory neurotransmitter in the human brain that regulates cognitive functions such as learning and memory, which are usually impaired in ASD. Over the last several years, increasing evidence from genetics, neuroimaging, protein expression, and animal model studies supporting the notion of altered glutamate metabolism has heightened the interest in evaluating glutamatergic dysfunction in ASD. Numerous pharmacological, behavioral, and imaging studies have demonstrated the imbalance in excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters, thus revealing the involvement of the glutamatergic system in ASD pathology. Here, we review the effects of genetic alterations on glutamate and its receptors in ASD and the role of non-invasive imaging modalities in detecting these changes. We also highlight the potential therapeutic targets associated with impaired glutamatergic pathways.
35296809|a|Large-scale genetic studies have revealed that the most prominent genes disrupted in autism are chromatin regulators mediating histone methylation/demethylation, suggesting the central role of epigenetic dysfunction in this disorder. Here, we show that histone lysine 4 dimethylation (H3K4me2), a histone mark linked to gene activation, is significantly decreased in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) of autistic human patients and mutant mice with the deficiency of top-ranking autism risk factor Shank3 or Cul3. A brief treatment of the autism models with highly potent and selective inhibitors of the H3K4me2 demethylase LSD1 (KDM1A) leads to the robust rescue of core symptoms of autism, including social deficits and repetitive behaviors. Concomitantly, LSD1 inhibition restores NMDA receptor function in PFC and AMPA receptor-mediated currents in striatum of Shank3-deficient mice. Genome-wide RNAseq and ChIPseq reveal that treatment of Shank3-deficient mice with the LSD1 inhibitor restores the expression and H3K4me2 occupancy of downregulated genes enriched in synaptic signaling and developmental processes. The immediate early gene tightly linked to neuronal plasticity, Egr1, is on the top list of rescued genes. The diminished transcription of Egr1 is recapitulated in PFC of autistic human patients. Overexpression of Egr1 in PFC of Shank3-deficient mice ameliorates social preference deficits. These results have for the first time revealed an important role of H3K4me2 abnormality in ASD pathophysiology, and the therapeutic potential of targeting H3K4me2 demethylase LSD1 or the downstream molecule Egr1 for ASD.
35296214|a|Children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) demonstrate challenges in various areas of social communication. The aim of this study was to examine the effect of Pivotal Response Treatment (PRT) targeting question-asking on brain activity in twenty 6-12-year-old autistic boys, using a Randomized Clinical Trial (RCT) design. Verbal children, diagnosed with autism, who lacked question asking in their communication were matched based on age and mean length utterance (MLU) and were randomly placed in either PRT intervention or treatment as usual (TAU) groups. Sessions were individually administered, lasting for 60 minutes three days a week for a two-month period. All children were tested before and after intervention to assess behavioral areas (questions, general communicative skills, and MLU) and both groups underwent electroencephalography for 10 minutes in open and closed eye resting-state conditions to assess neural correlates. Data were analyzed using covariance analysis and post-hoc using Mann-Whitney and Wilcoxon methods. Significant behavioral improvements in the PRT group were observed after intervention that correlated with changes in Electroencephalography (EEG) oscillations at several brain regions compared to the TAU group. The results of this study support other studies suggesting collateral neural changes following the PRT.
35295842|a|The human gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) transporter 1 (hGAT-1) is the first member of the solute carrier 6 (SLC6) protein superfamily. GAT-1 (SLC6A1) is one of the main GABA transporters in the central nervous system. Its principal physiological role is retrieving GABA from the synapse into neurons and astrocytes, thus swiftly terminating neurotransmission. GABA is a key inhibitory neurotransmitter and shifts in GABAergic signaling can lead to pathological conditions, from anxiety and epileptic seizures to schizophrenia. Point mutations in the SLC6A1 gene frequently give rise to epilepsy, intellectual disability or autism spectrum disorders in the afflicted individuals. The mechanistic routes underlying these are still fairly unclear. Some loss-of-function variants impair the folding and intracellular trafficking of the protein (thus retaining the transporter in the endoplasmic reticulum compartment), whereas others, despite managing to reach their bona fide site of action at the cell surface, nonetheless abolish GABA transport activity (plausibly owing to structural/conformational defects). Whatever the molecular culprit(s), the physiological aftermath transpires into the absence of functional transporters, which in turn perturbs GABAergic actions. Dozens of mutations in the kin SLC6 family members are known to exhort protein misfolding. Such events typically elicit severe ailments in people, e.g., infantile parkinsonism-dystonia or X-linked intellectual disability, in the case of dopamine and creatine transporters, respectively. Flaws in protein folding can be rectified by small molecules known as pharmacological and/or chemical chaperones. The search for such apt remedies calls for a systematic investigation and categorization of the numerous disease-linked variants, by biochemical and pharmacological means in vitro (in cell lines and primary neuronal cultures) and in vivo (in animal models). We here give special emphasis to the utilization of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster as a versatile model in GAT-1-related studies. Jointly, these approaches can portray indispensable insights into the molecular factors underlying epilepsy, and ultimately pave the way for contriving efficacious therapeutic options for patients harboring pathogenic mutations in hGAT-1.
35295773|a|According to the scientific literature, 50 to 70% of individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) also present with comorbid attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). From a clinical perspective, this high rate of comorbidity is intriguing. What is the real significance of this dual diagnosis? Is ADHD in fact always present in such cases? Might the attentional impairment reported among our ASD patients actually be a distinct trait of their ASD-namely, impaired joint attention-rather than an ADHD attention deficit? Could their agitation be the consequence of this joint attention impairment or related to a physical restlessness etiologically very different from the agitation typical of ADHD? The neurobiological reality of ASD-ADHD comorbidity is a subject of debate, and amphetamine-based treatment can have paradoxical or undesirable effects in the ASD population. Consequently, does a dual diagnosis, notwithstanding its currency in the literature, prevent us from shedding sufficient light on major physiopathologic questions raised by the clinical picture of ASD?
35295772|a|Introduction: Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC) is a multi-system genetic disorder with various TSC-Associated Neuropsychiatric Disorders (TAND) that significantly impact the mental health and wellbeing of individuals with TSC and their caregivers. TAND represents the number one concern to families worldwide, yet is highly under-identified and under-treated. The clinician-administered TAND-Checklist (Lifetime version, TAND-L) has improved identification of TAND in clinical settings. However, many individuals with TSC and their caregivers still have difficulty accessing suitable support for diagnosis and evidence-informed interventions. The TANDem study is a community-based participatory research project with a broad range of TSC stakeholders aimed at reducing the TAND identification and treatment gap. Objectives: Participatory research identified three priority next steps: 1) development and validation of a self-report, quantified version of the TAND Checklist (TAND-SQ) and building the TAND-SQ into a smartphone application, 2) generation of consensus clinical recommendations for the identification and treatment of TAND, to be incorporated as a TAND toolkit on the app, and 3) establishment of a global TAND consortium through networking, capacity-building and public engagement activities. Methods: TANDem is a four-year project, and includes 24 consortium members from 10 countries representing all World Health Organization regions. Collaborators represent five stakeholder groups (family representatives, technology experts, clinical experts, non-profit organisations and researchers). Here we outline the project study protocol in detail, describing the scientific rationale, the project aims and objectives, the methods involved in participant recruitment, multi-site and multi-phase data collection, data analysis, ethical considerations including informed consent, data protection, privacy and confidentiality considerations related to the European Union General Data Protection Regulation and the USA Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act. The expected outcomes and potential impact on the TSC community, implementation and dissemination of results, as well as future scale-up and scale-out plans are also discussed. Conclusions: The TANDem project has the potential to transform the global TSC community by empowering families living with TSC through an easily accessible digital solution to allow them to document their own TAND needs linked to an evidence-informed toolkit to enhance personalised healthcare, and by providing healthcare professionals with consensus clinical recommendations to prevent, identify and manage TAND manifestations.
35295704|a|Objective: Early detection of developmental delays relies on the accuracy of the caregivers' concerns of children's developmental problems. The aim of this study was to investigate the agreement between the caregivers' awareness of children's developmental problems and professional identification. Methods: Caregivers of 1,963 children (age range: 5-71 months; mean: 38.4 months) younger than 6 years old who were at risk of developmental delays and referred to the center for a comprehensive evaluation were enrolled in this study. Children were identified by a transdisciplinary team including a pediatric neurologist, a pediatric psychiatrist, two psychologists, two occupational therapists, two physical therapists, two speech therapists, a social worker, and a special instructor. A series of standardized developmental assessments were used to identify children with developmental delay. Retrospective chart reviews were conducted on all children to confirm specific developmental disorders. Results: The caregivers' initial concerns of cognitive, speech/language, emotional/behavioral, and motor and global development showed low agreement with the results of professional identification. The major disagreement was observed in the cognitive domain. Speech/language developmental concern was an important red-flag indicator of cognitive and emotional/behavioral developmental delays. The presence of intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder was high in this study. When having caregivers' concerns about speech/language and emotional/behavioral development, the odds of children with autism spectrum disorder was 2.37 and 2.17 times greater than those without autism spectrum disorder, respectively. The presence of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder was significantly associated with concerns about cognitive and emotional/behavioral developmental delays. Child's age and mothers' level of education were significant indicators for detecting the child's developmental problems. Conclusion: It is recommended that assessing the cognitive developmental status is essential for all children in the identification process. Practitioners should not overlook caregivers' concern about speech/language and emotional/behavioral development. Transdisciplinary practitioners provide educational guidance to caregivers, especially in the domains of cognitive, speech/language, and emotional/behavioral development.
35295559|a|Social communication difficulties are a diagnostic feature in autism. These difficulties are sometimes attributed, at least in part, to impaired ability in making inferences about what other people mean. In this registered report, we tested a competing hypothesis that the communication profile of adults on the autism spectrum can be more strongly characterised by reduced confidence in making inferences in the face of uncertain information. We tested this hypothesis by comparing the performance of 102 autistic and 109 non-autistic adults on a test of implied meaning, using a test of grammaticality judgements as a control task. We hypothesised that autistic adults would report substantially lower confidence, allowing for differences in accuracy, than non-autistic adults on the test of implied meaning compared to the grammaticality test. However, our results did not suggest this. Instead, we found that accuracy and confidence were both reduced to a similar extent on the test of implied meaning in the autistic group compared to the control group, although these were only subtle differences. This pattern of results was specific to inference-making, as the autistic and non-autistic groups did not differ on the grammar test. This supports the idea that specific differences in pragmatic language processing can exist in autism in the absence of core language problems. Importantly, this pattern of results (differences on the test of implied meaning and no differences on the grammar test) was reversed in a group with self-reported reading difficulties, indicating that the differences in inference-making were specific to the autistic group. Lastly, we found relationships between Intolerance of Uncertainty, performance on the test of implied meaning, and self-reported social communication challenges. This supports the idea that discomfort with uncertainty plays a role in the pragmatic language and communication challenges in autism.
35294952|a|n/a.
35294900|a|The architecture whereby activity across many brain regions integrates to encode individual appetitive social behavior remains unknown. Here we measure electrical activity from eight brain regions as mice engage in a social preference assay. We then use machine learning to discover a network that encodes the extent to which individual mice engage another mouse. This network is organized by theta oscillations leading from prelimbic cortex and amygdala that converge on the ventral tegmental area. Network activity is synchronized with cellular firing, and frequency-specific activation of a circuit within this network increases social behavior. Finally, the network generalizes, on a mouse-by-mouse basis, to encode individual differences in social behavior in healthy animals but fails to encode individual behavior in a 'high confidence' genetic model of autism. Thus, our findings reveal the architecture whereby the brain integrates distributed activity across timescales to encode an appetitive brain state underlying individual differences in social behavior.
35294714|a|Job interviews are an integral component of the hiring process in most fields. Our research examines job interview performance of those with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) compared to neurotypical (NT) individuals. ASD and NT individuals were taped engaging in mock job interviews. Candidates were rated on a variety of dimensions by respondents who either watched the interview videos or read the interview transcripts and were naive to the neurodiversity of the interviewees. NT candidates outperformed ASD candidates in the video condition, but in the absence of visual and social cues (transcript condition), individuals with ASD outperformed NT candidates. Our findings suggest that social style significantly influences hiring decisions in traditional job interviews and may bias evaluators against otherwise qualified candidates.
35293965|a|
35292925|a|The efficacy of bumetanide (oral liquid formulation 0.5 mg bid) as a treatment for the core symptoms of autism spectrum disorders in children and adolescents aged 7-17 years is being investigated in an international, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III study. The primary endpoint is the change in Childhood Autism Rating Scale 2 (CARS2) total raw score after 6 months of treatment. At baseline, the 211 participants analysed are broadly representative of autistic subjects in this age range: mean (SD) age, 10.4 (3.0) years; 82.5% male; 47.7% with intelligence quotient >= 70. Mean CARS2 score was 40.1 (4.9) and mean Social Responsiveness Scale score was 116.7 (23.4). Final study results will provide data on efficacy and safety of bumetanide in autistic children and adolescents.
35292625|a|We previously linked TSHZ3 haploinsufficiency to autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and showed that embryonic or postnatal Tshz3 deletion in mice results in behavioral traits relevant to the two core domains of ASD, namely social interaction deficits and repetitive behaviors. Here, we provide evidence that cortical projection neurons (CPNs) and striatal cholinergic interneurons (SCINs) are two main and complementary players in the TSHZ3-linked ASD syndrome. In the cerebral cortex, TSHZ3 is expressed in CPNs and in a proportion of GABAergic interneurons, but not in cholinergic interneurons or glial cells. In the striatum, TSHZ3 is expressed in all SCINs, while its expression is absent or partial in the other main brain cholinergic systems. We then characterized two new conditional knockout (cKO) models generated by crossing Tshz3flox/flox with Emx1-Cre (Emx1-cKO) or Chat-Cre (Chat-cKO) mice to decipher the respective role of CPNs and SCINs. Emx1-cKO mice show altered excitatory synaptic transmission onto CPNs and impaired plasticity at corticostriatal synapses, with neither cortical neuron loss nor abnormal layer distribution. These animals present social interaction deficits but no repetitive patterns of behavior. Chat-cKO mice exhibit no loss of SCINs but changes in the electrophysiological properties of these interneurons, associated with repetitive patterns of behavior without social interaction deficits. Therefore, dysfunction in either CPNs or SCINs segregates with a distinct ASD behavioral trait. These findings provide novel insights onto the implication of the corticostriatal circuitry in ASD by revealing an unexpected neuronal dichotomy in the biological background of the two core behavioral domains of this disorder.
35292617|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by difficulties in social processes, interactions, and communication. Yet, the neurocognitive bases underlying these difficulties are unclear. Here, we triangulated the 'trans-diagnostic' approach to personality, social trait judgments of faces, and neurophysiology to investigate (1) the relative position of autistic traits in a comprehensive social-affective personality space, and (2) the distinct associations between the social-affective personality dimensions and social trait judgment from faces in individuals with ASD and neurotypical individuals. We collected personality and facial judgment data from a large sample of online participants (N = 89 self-identified ASD; N = 307 neurotypical controls). Factor analysis with 33 subscales of 10 social-affective personality questionnaires identified a 4-dimensional personality space. This analysis revealed that ASD and control participants did not differ significantly along the personality dimensions of empathy and prosociality, antisociality, or social agreeableness. However, the ASD participants exhibited a weaker association between prosocial personality dimensions and judgments of facial trustworthiness and warmth than the control participants. Neurophysiological data also indicated that ASD participants had a weaker association with neuronal representations for trustworthiness and warmth from faces. These results suggest that the atypical association between social-affective personality and social trait judgment from faces may contribute to the social and affective difficulties associated with ASD.
35292337|a|Over the past six years, a rapidly growing number of studies have shown that respiration exerts a significant influence on sensory, affective, and cognitive processes. At the same time, an increasing amount of experimental evidence indicates that this influence occurs via modulation of neural oscillations and their synchronization between brain areas. In this article, we review the relevant findings and discuss whether they might inform our understanding of a variety of disorders that have been associated with abnormal patterns of respiration. We review literature on the role of respiration in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), anxiety (panic attacks), and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and we conclude that the new insights into respiratory modulation of neuronal activity may help understand the relationship between respiratory abnormalities and cognitive and affective deficits.
35292070|a|BACKGROUND: There is strong evidence to support the association between bullying and the onset of mental health conditions in students with ASD (autism spectrum disorder). In Taiwan, the seventh grade marks the first year of middle school, following elementary school. This period is also when peers tend to perform bullying behaviours to establish status among the peer group. Therefore, seventh grade is considered one of the most challenging times for students with ASD due to several changes within the school environment and the developmental changes that arise at this age. This study aims to assess the association between the school environment and bullying victimization among students with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) enrolled in regular classes in their first year of middle school. METHODS: Data were obtained from the Special Needs Education Longitudinal Study database located in the Survey Research Data Archive of Academia Sinica. The analysis included one hundred eighty-four seventh graders with ASD who were in regular classes across Taiwan. The primary variables under study were whether the participants had experienced social exclusion, insults or teasing, extortion, or sexual harassment over the past semester. RESULTS: Participants with a higher positive friendship quality (P = 0.027) and who had received more peer support upon encountering difficulties in school (P = 0.041) were less likely to experience social exclusion. Participants with a higher positive friendship quality (P = 0.001) and a more positive classroom learning environment (P = 0.031) were less likely to have experienced insults or teasing. However, participants with more friends were more likely to be extorted (P = 0.015) and sexually harassed (P = 0.001) than those with fewer friends. Furthermore, participants in regular classes on a part-time basis were 2.59 times more likely to report sexual harassment than those in regular classes on a full-time basis (P = 0.021). CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that a supportive school environment reduces the likelihood that seventh-graders with ASD will be bullied. Clinicians should consider the association between the school environment and bullying victimization among adolescents with ASD in regular classes during their first year of middle school.
35291020|a|In resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI), artefactual signals arising from subject motion can dwarf and obfuscate the neuronal activity signal. Typical motion correction approaches involve the generation of nuisance regressors, which are timeseries of non-brain signals regressed out of the fMRI timeseries to yield putatively artifact-free data. Recent work suggests that concatenating all regressors into a single regression model is more effective than the sequential application of individual regressors, which may reintroduce previously removed artifacts. This work compares 18 motion correction pipelines consisting of head motion, independent components analysis, and non-neuronal physiological signal regressors in sequential or concatenated combinations. The pipelines are evaluated on a dataset of cognitively normal individuals with repeat imaging and on datasets of studies of Autism Spectrum Disorder, Major Depressive Disorder, and Parkinson's Disease. Extensive metrics of motion artifact removal are measured, including resting state network recovery, Quality Control-Functional Connectivity (QC-FC) correlation, distance-dependent artifact, network modularity, and test-retest reliability of multiple rs-fMRI analyses. The results reveal limitations in previously proposed metrics, including the QC-FC correlation and modularity quality, and identify more robust artifact removal metrics. The results also reveal limitations in the concatenated regression approach, which is outperformed by the sequential regression approach in the test-retest reliability metrics. Finally, pipelines are recommended that perform well based on quantitative and qualitative comparisons across multiple datasets and robust metrics. These new insights and recommendations help address the need for effective motion artifact correction to reduce noise and confounds in rs-fMRI.
35290949|a|BACKGROUND: With the increasing prevalence of autistic individuals, it is greatly needed to examine the factors impacting their community participation experiences. Where autistic adults live and how that may be related to their participation and quality of life is one environmental factor that has received little attention. AIMS: This study explored the association between living arrangements in the community and community participation for autistic adults. METHOD: This study used data from a statewide survey of autistic adults (N = 744) to investigate the relationship between living arrangements (live alone with or without support, live with roommate/spouse, or live with family) and the amount, breadth, and sufficiency of community participation. RESULTS: After controlling for sociodemographic and clinical factors known to be associated with community participation, autistic adults living with family members participated less frequently in community activities over 30 days than those living with a roommate/spouse. However, they experienced similar levels of sufficiency with their participation. Autistic adults living alone with support reported the lowest levels of sufficiency with their participation, although the amount and breadth of their participation were no different from other adults. CONCLUSION: These findings have several implications for providing support to enable autistic adults to participate in the areas that are important to them and to the extent they desire. Future research is needed to gain a better understanding of how interests and expectations for participation may be influenced by living situations.
35290885|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a very heterogeneous disorder. Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) comorbidity, frequent in ASD, could be useful to define a specific ASD subtype. Our objective was to explore if adults with ASD and comorbid OCD could present a specific clinical profile of ASD in 89 high functioning-adult ASD patients. We found that adults with ASD and comorbid OCD showed a lower verbal IQ and a more severe impairments in social cognition. ASD with comorbid OCD present a specific clinical profile which could constitute a possible subtype of ASD.
35290800|a|Suicidality in autistic youth is a major public health issue. This study aimed to determine global prevalence of, and risk/protective factors for suicidality in autistic youth via systematic review and meta-analysis. We systematically searched Embase, PubMed, PsycINFO, Web of Science, and the Cochrane library for studies from inception to November 22nd, 2021. We selected empirical studies reporting on suicide outcomes (i.e., ideation, behaviors, attempts and deaths) in autistic youth (<=25 years). Random effects models were used to estimate the pooled prevalence of suicide outcomes with 95% confidence interval (CI). Heterogeneity was investigated with potential moderators using meta-regression analyses. The final selection included 47 papers, 29 of which were included in meta-analyses and 37 were narratively synthesized (sociodemographic, psychiatric, psychological, other factors, and interventions). The pooled prevalence of suicidal ideation was 25.2% (95% CI 18.2-33.8; i.e., one in four), suicide attempts 8.3% (3.6-18.2), and suicide deaths 0.2% (0.05-0.52). Estimates in self-reports were higher than in parent-reports. Age was a significant but inconsistent moderator on suicide outcomes, but substantial heterogeneity remained. Adverse childhood experiences were strong risk factors for suicidality, while resilience was protective. Participatory suicide risk-assessment, early intervention, and resilience promotion should be primary clinical/research goals.
35290762|a|Studies of de novo mutation (DNM) have typically excluded some of the most repetitive and complex regions of the genome because these regions cannot be unambiguously mapped with short-read sequencing data. To better understand the genome-wide pattern of DNM, we generated long-read sequence data from an autism parent-child quad with an affected female where no pathogenic variant had been discovered in short-read Illumina sequence data. We deeply sequenced all four individuals by using three sequencing platforms (Illumina, Oxford Nanopore, and Pacific Biosciences) and three complementary technologies (Strand-seq, optical mapping, and 10X Genomics). Using long-read sequencing, we initially discovered and validated 171 DNMs across two children-a 20% increase in the number of de novo single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) and indels when compared to short-read callsets. The number of DNMs further increased by 5% when considering a more complete human reference (T2T-CHM13) because of the recovery of events in regions absent from GRCh38 (e.g., three DNMs in heterochromatic satellites). In total, we validated 195 de novo germline mutations and 23 potential post-zygotic mosaic mutations across both children; the overall true substitution rate based on this integrated callset is at least 1.41 x 10-8 substitutions per nucleotide per generation. We also identified six de novo insertions and deletions in tandem repeats, two of which represent structural variants. We demonstrate that long-read sequencing and assembly, especially when combined with a more complete reference genome, increases the number of DNMs by >25% compared to previous studies, providing a more complete catalog of DNM compared to short-read data alone.
35290666|a|Prior studies on treatment relapse have typically examined the prevalence of resurgence or renewal of target behavior (e.g., destructive behavior) in isolation. This study analyzed both types of relapse during 25 consecutive treatments involving functional communication training during worsening reinforcement conditions for alternative behavior (i.e., schedule thinning) or following context changes. We also examined disruption of alternative behavior (i.e., functional communication requests, compliance). Resurgence and renewal of destructive behavior occurred in 76% and 69% of treatments, respectively, and in approximately a third of changes in reinforcement or context. Relapse of destructive behavior predicted alternative-response disruption and vice versa; the co-occurrence of these two events always exceeded the background probabilities of either event occurring in isolation. General reductions in treatment efficacy occurred across changes in reinforcement or context, with no apparent decrease in likelihood in later transitions. We discuss implications of our findings with respect to future studies examining treatment durability.
35290561|a|There is increasing literature showing that the presentation of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) could be different according to the sex of the patient. Through the analysis of the Autism Diagnostic Interview Revised interview results of a study group consisting of 56 preschool children diagnosed with ASD potential differences in the presentation of ASD were searched. Variables investigated were verbal abilities, the presence/absence of unusual sensory interests, as well as of echolalia. The results showed significant differences between gender in restricted and repetitive behavior (p < 0.01), in particular for those children who have no unusual sensory interest (p < 0.05) and with minimal verbal ability (p < 0.05). The findings contribute providing evidences on phenotypical differences in preschool children with a diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder.
35290560|a|The relationship between maternal parenting and the prosocial behavior of a child with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) was tested cross-sectionally (Study 1) and longitudinally (Study 2). In Study 1, maternal prosocial behavior was moderately associated with child behavior, and maternal positive parenting completely mediated this relationship. In Study 2, we found that the association between guidance (T1) and maternal prosocial behavior (T2) was significant, as were the longitudinal and mutual associations between high control and child prosocial behavior. However, a mediating effect of any component of parenting was not found in the longitudinal data. These results suggest an important role for maternal parenting in the development of prosocial behavior in children with ASD.
35289976|a|Naturalistic imaging paradigms, in which participants view complex videos in the scanner, are increasingly used in human cognitive neuroscience. Videos evoke temporally synchronized brain responses that are similar across subjects as well as within subjects, but the reproducibility of these brain responses across different data acquisition sites has not yet been quantified. Here, we characterize the consistency of brain responses across independent samples of participants viewing the same videos in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scanners at different sites (Indiana University and Caltech). We compared brain responses collected at these different sites for two carefully matched datasets with identical scanner models, acquisition, and preprocessing details, along with a third unmatched dataset in which these details varied. Our overall conclusion is that for matched and unmatched datasets alike, video-evoked brain responses have high consistency across these different sites, both when compared across groups and across pairs of individuals. As one might expect, differences between sites were larger for unmatched datasets than matched datasets. Residual differences between datasets could in part reflect participant-level variability rather than scanner- or data- related effects. Altogether our results indicate promise for the development and, critically, generalization of video fMRI studies of individual differences in healthy and clinical populations alike.
35289701|a|This study was designed to extend research on motor skill development in autism spectrum disorder using a dual-task skill. Nine autistic and 18 non-autistic youths walked without grasping or while reaching to grasp a small or large object. Step extremity ratio, percent time in double support, and normalized speed were quantified. We hypothesized that gait would differ between autistic and non-autistic youth and that differences would be moderated by the phase (approach and grasp) and the complexity of the task (walking and grasping versus walking alone). Although gait parameters were similar during the walking-only trials, the combined task resulted in slower speed and shorter steps in autistic youth, particularly during the grasp phase. These findings, while in a small sample, offer preliminary evidence that autistic youth who show typical gait during simple assessments of motor ability may have difficulties in more complex tasks that require the coordination of movements.
35289115|a|We investigate whether autistic people's vulnerability is taken into account at each stage of the criminal justice system (CJS). Defense lawyers from 12 nations were included in the study although the sample was predominantly from the UK. Lawyers completed an online survey regarding one case in which they had defended an autistic client between January 2015 and January 2020; and on one case in which they had defended a nonautistic client charged with a similar offense, to provide a comparison group. Ninety-three lawyers (85% in the UK) reported on one autistic case, and 53 also reported on one nonautistic case. 75% of autistic clients were not given reasonable adjustments during the process. Only 43% were offered an appropriate adult during police investigations, even though they had an existing diagnosis of autism. 59% of prosecution barristers and 46% of judges said or did something during the trial that made the lawyers concerned that they did not have an adequate understanding of autism. Lawyers were 7.58 times more likely to be concerned about their autistic client's effective participation in court and were 3.83 times more likely to be concerned that their autistic clients would engage in self-harm, compared with their nonautistic clients. There is a failure to identify and address autistic peoples' disability within the CJS. There is a need for mandatory autism training for police officers and the judiciary, with a focus on identifying autism and understanding the needs of autistic people so that reasonable adjustments are offered in all cases. LAY SUMMARY: This study sought to investigate if the needs of autistic people are being overlooked by the police and other professionals within the CJS. Results show that autistic people are not always given the support they need during police questioning or in court. The experience of being involved with the police may also have a more negative impact on autistic peoples' mental health than that of nonautistic people.
35288609|a|Sensory differences between autism and neuro-typical populations are well-documented and have often been explained by either weak-central-coherence or excitation/inhibition-imbalance cortical theories. We tested these theories with perceptual multi-stability paradigms in which dissimilar images presented to each eye generate dynamic cyclopean percepts based on ongoing cortical grouping and suppression processes. We studied perceptual multi-stability with Interocular Grouping (IOG), which requires the simultaneous integration and suppression of image fragments from both eyes, and Conventional Binocular Rivalry (CBR), which only requires global suppression of either eye, in 17 autistic adults and 18 neurotypical participants. We used a Hidden-Markov-Model as tool to analyze the multistable dynamics of these processes. Overall, the dynamics of multi-stable perception were slower (i.e. there were longer durations and fewer transitions among perceptual states) in the autistic group compared to the neurotypical group for both IOG and CBR. The weighted Markovian transition distributions revealed key differences between both groups and paradigms. The results indicate overall lower levels of suppression and decreased levels of grouping in autistic than neurotypical participants, consistent with elements of excitation/inhibition imbalance and weak-central-coherence theories.
35288451|a|The marble burying test is a commonly used paradigm to describe phenotypes in mouse models of neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders. The current methodological approach relies predominantly on reporting the number of buried marbles at the end of the test. By measuring the proxy of the behavior (buried marbles), many important characteristics regarding the temporal aspect of this assay are lost. Here we introduce a novel, automated method to quantify mouse behavior during the marble burying test with the focus on the burying bouts and movement dynamics. Using open-source software packages, we trained a supervised machine learning algorithm (the "classifier") to distinguish burying behavior in freely moving mice. In order to confirm the classifier's accuracy and characterize burying events in high detail, we performed the marble burying test in three mouse models: Ube3am-/p+ (Angelman Syndrome model), Shank2-/- (autism model), and Sapap3-/- (obsessive-compulsive disorder model) mice. The classifier scored burying behavior accurately and consistent with the previously reported phenotype of the Ube3am-/p+ mice, which showed decreased levels of burying compared to controls. Shank2-/- mice showed a similar pattern of decreased burying behavior, which was not found in Sapap3-/- mice. Tracking mouse behavior throughout the test revealed hypoactivity in Ube3am-/p+ and hyperactivity in the Shank2-/- mice, indicating that mouse activity is unrelated to burying behavior. Reducing activity with midazolam in Shank2-/- mice did not alter the burying behavior. Together, we demonstrate that our classifier is an accurate method for the analysis of the marble burying test, providing more information than currently used methods.Significance StatementThe marble burying test is widely used in phenotyping neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorder mouse models. Currently, its analysis consists largely of manually scoring the number of buried marbles upon the completion of the assay. This approach is not standardized across laboratories, and leaves out important variables such as movement characteristics and information about the burying bouts. We introduce a method that reliably tracks mouse behavior throughout the experiment, classifies the duration and number of the burying bouts, and is generalizable across laboratories. Using machine learning for measuring the actual burying behavior standardizes this method, and provides rich information about the burying characteristics and overall behavior.
35287489|a|Background. Levodopa-based drugs are widely used for mitigating the complications induced by Parkinson's disease (PD). Despite the positive effects, several issues regarding the way that levodopa changes brain activities have remained unclear. Methods. A combined strategy using EEG data and graph theory was used for investigating how levodopa changed connectome and processing hubs of the brain during resting-state. Obtained results were subjected to ANOVA test and multiple-comparison post-hoc correction procedure. Results. Outcomes showed that graph topology was not significantly different between PD and healthy groups during the eyes-closed condition, while in the eyes-open condition, statistically significant differences were found. The main effect of levodopa medication was observed for gamma-band activity in which levodopa changed the brain connectome toward a star-like topology. Considering the beta subband of EEG data, graph leaf number increased following levodopa medication in PD patients. Enhanced brain connectivity in the gamma band and reduced beta band connections in the basal ganglia were also observed after levodopa medication. Furthermore, source localization using dipole fitting showed that levodopa suppressed the activity of collateral trigone. Conclusion. Our combined EEG and graph analysis showed that levodopa medication changed the brain connectome, especially in the high-frequency range of brain electrical activities (beta and gamma).
35287481|a|The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of a procedure involving systematic withdrawal of stimulus prompts and tangible reinforcers on the acquisition, maintenance, and generalization of eye contact and gaze following for two children with ASD in China. Two boys with ASD (5-6 years of age) participated. A concurrent multiple probe design across behaviors and participants was used. Results indicate that the procedure effectively established eye contact and gaze following for both children. Generalization to new instructors occurred in the free play setting, and the acquired behaviors were maintained for 1 month following training. Eye contact was maintained with social consequences for one child; the other child required tokens along with social consequences to maintain eye contact. Social consequences were sufficient to maintain gaze following for both children.
35287312|a|Although there are a variety of psychological and therapeutic approaches to coping Autism Spectrum Disorder, people with autism still face some challenges in a "normal" therapy setting. Some therapy organizations and services have proposed an alternative therapy approach, Animal-assisted therapy (AAT). The aim of this phenomenological study was to gain a better understanding of the therapists and parents of individuals who choose the alternative approach, AAT. Data were collected through structured interviews with a group of three therapists and four parents. An analysis of the data revealed three main themes; the first theme named the perceived benefits of AAT with three subthemes consisting of physical benefits, sensory benefits and emotional benefits. The second theme is named the way AAT works with subthemes of client-centred therapy and mixed models, and the third theme is potential limitations of AAT. Limitations and suggestions for future research are discussed.
35287203|a|Hormones are essential chemical messengers that modulate body homeostasis and regulate appetite, mood, reproduction, and metabolism in the human body. Its dysregulation in the body can cause diabetes, Alzheimer's disease, and autism. The detection of hormone levels in biological fluids, including serum samples, could facilitate the precaution, diagnosis, and cure of diseases. Voltammetric sensing devices exhibiting significant sensitivity, selectivity, as well as facile, cost-effective fabrication, are one of the promising methods for detecting hormone levels. Thus, this review briefly highlights recent advances toward developing voltammetric sensors for a wide spectrum of amino acid-derived, peptide, and lipid-derived hormones alongside their applications to the analyses of human serum samples. Furthermore, several challenging issues and the prospects of voltammetric hormone-sensing devices in clinical diagnostic applications are discussed.
35286477|a|Language capacities in autism spectrum disorders (ASD) range from normal scores on standardized language tests to absence of functional language in a substantial minority of 30% of individuals with ASD. Due to practical difficulties of scanning at this severe end of the spectrum, insights from MRI are scarce. Here we used manual deterministic tractography to investigate, for the first time, the integrity of the core white matter tracts defining the language connectivity network in non-verbal ASD (nvASD): the three segments of the arcuate (AF), the inferior fronto-occipital (IFOF), the inferior longitudinal (ILF) and the uncinate (UF) fasciculi, and the frontal aslant tract (FAT). A multiple case series of nine individuals with nvASD were compared to matched individuals with verbal ASD (vASD) and typical development (TD). Bonferroni-corrected repeated measure ANOVAs were performed separately for each tract-Hemisphere (2:Left/Right) x Group (3:TD/vASD/nvASD). Main results revealed (i) a main effect of group consisting in a reduction in fractional anisotropy (FA) in the IFOF in nvASD relative to TD; (ii) a main effect of group revealing lower values of radial diffusivity (RD) in the long segment of the AF in nvASD compared to vASD group; and (iii) a reduced volume in the left hemisphere of the UF when compared to the right, in the vASD group only. These results do not replicate volumetric differences of the dorsal language route previously observed in nvASD, and instead point to a disruption of the ventral language pathway, in line with semantic deficits observed behaviourally in this group.
35286347|a|Autistic children grow to become autistic adults, and autism is increasingly diagnosed in adulthood and later life. This qualitative study aimed to understand experiences of autism throughout adulthood. A national cohort study of autistic adults and relatives of autistic adults (ASC-UK), enabled purposive recruitment of a diverse sample. Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 29 autistic adults (aged 20-71 years), mostly diagnosed in adulthood, and 16 relatives (aged 31-81 years) of autistic adults diagnosed across both childhood and adulthood (including some with learning disability). Interview topics included health, relationships, education, employment, quality of life and everyday experiences. Thematic analysis of the accounts of the autistic adults identified six key themes relating to their experiences: (1) diagnosis as validating yet limiting; (2) supportive and non-supportive social agents; (3) the "invisibility" of the needs of autistic adults; (4) health in the context of autism; (5) staying 'outside' the circle; and (6) multiple lives with autism. Data from relatives about autistic adult experiences gave additional perspectives on these themes. Experiences reported in other studies-of 'difference' from others, challenges of social engagement, and learning to 'conform' to society's expectations-were evident and relevant to male and female autistic adults, across all age groups, and unrelated to stage of life when diagnosed. Some expressed disappointment with their lives, but others were proud of their achievements. Education and employment, whilst challenging for many, were also rewarding for some. Health care and social services were often experienced as inaccessible, inappropriate, or lacking understanding of the individual's needs. We conclude that greater public understanding of autism as experienced in adulthood is needed. Key priorities are improving the availability of 'appropriate' health and social care services for autistic adults and families, and providing practical support to enable enhanced participation in life.
35286265|a|Graph neural networks (GNNs) have received increasing interest in the medical imaging field given their powerful graph embedding ability to characterize the non-Euclidean structure of brain networks based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data. However, previous studies are largely node-centralized and ignore edge features for graph classification tasks, resulting in moderate performance of graph classification accuracy. Moreover, the generalizability of GNN model is still far from satisfactory in brain disorder [e.g., autism spectrum disorder (ASD)] identification due to considerable individual differences in symptoms among patients as well as data heterogeneity among different sites. In order to address the above limitations, this study proposes a novel adversarial learning-based node-edge graph attention network (AL-NEGAT) for ASD identification based on multimodal MRI data. First, both node and edge features are modeled based on structural and functional MRI data to leverage complementary brain information and preserved in the constructed weighted adjacent matrix for individuals through the attention mechanism in the proposed NEGAT. Second, two AL methods are employed to improve the generalizability of NEGAT. Finally, a gradient-based saliency map strategy is utilized for model interpretation to identify important brain regions and connections contributing to the classification. Experimental results based on the public Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange I (ABIDE I) data demonstrate that the proposed framework achieves a classification accuracy of 74.7% between ASD and typical developing (TD) groups based on 1007 subjects across 17 different sites and outperforms the state-of-the-art methods, indicating satisfying classification ability and generalizability of the proposed AL-NEGAT model. Our work provides a powerful tool for brain disorder identification.
35286203|a|SignificancePrenatal exposure to maternal infection increases the risk of developing mental health disorders, such as schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorder. Exposure to maternal immune activation has been associated with a number of neuroanatomical deficits in adolescent and adult offspring, with differing effects based on the gestational timing of infection. However, little is known about how the embryo brain is affected. We show, using whole-brain MRI, that maternal immune activation significantly affects brain anatomy. When the exposure occurs early in pregnancy, volume reductions are mainly observed, while the opposite is true for exposure later in pregnancy. Furthermore, we identify alterations to the density of certain classes of neurons and glia, which have been associated with stress and inflammation in the brain.
35285812|a|BACKGROUND: Mental health disorders are a leading cause of medical disabilities across an individual's lifespan. This burden is particularly substantial in children and adolescents because of challenges in diagnosis and the lack of precision medicine approaches. However, the widespread adoption of wearable devices (eg, smart watches) that are conducive for artificial intelligence applications to remotely diagnose and manage psychiatric disorders in children and adolescents is promising. OBJECTIVE: This study aims to conduct a scoping review to study, characterize, and identify areas of innovations with wearable devices that can augment current in-person physician assessments to individualize diagnosis and management of psychiatric disorders in child and adolescent psychiatry. METHODS: This scoping review used information from the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) guidelines. A comprehensive search of several databases from 2011 to June 25, 2021, limited to the English language and excluding animal studies, was conducted. The databases included Ovid MEDLINE and Epub ahead of print, in-process and other nonindexed citations, and daily; Ovid Embase; Ovid Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials; Ovid Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews; Web of Science; and Scopus. RESULTS: The initial search yielded 344 articles, from which 19 (5.5%) articles were left on the final source list for this scoping review. Articles were divided into three main groups as follows: studies with the main focus on autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and internalizing disorders such as anxiety disorders. Most of the studies used either cardio-fitness chest straps with electrocardiogram sensors or wrist-worn biosensors, such as watches by Fitbit. Both allowed passive data collection of the physiological signals. CONCLUSIONS: Our scoping review found a large heterogeneity of methods and findings in artificial intelligence studies in child psychiatry. Overall, the largest gap identified in this scoping review is the lack of randomized controlled trials, as most studies available were pilot studies and feasibility trials.
35285365|a|INTRODUCTION: Melatonin preparations are emerging first-line pharmacotherapy for insomnia in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), but quality, formulation, consistency, dosing, and limited long-term safety data are of concern. The recent approval of pediatric-appropriate prolonged-release melatonin (Ped-PRM) addresses these aspects. AREAS COVERED: A systematic search of PubMed and web of science for prospective, randomized, and controlled trials (RCTs) of melatonin preparations vs placebo in children and adolescents with ASD and the European public assessment report on Ped-PRM was conducted. EXPERT OPINION: Melatonin is rapidly absorbed and undergoes first pass hepatic metabolism by cytochrome CYP1A2; over 80% is excreted in the urine as 6-sulfatoxymelatonin (inactive). Immediate-release melatonin (IRM) is short-acting (3-4 h), whereas PRM provides therapeutic levels throughout the night. Drugs interacting with CYP1A2 are likely to slow-down melatonin metabolism. High variability in bioavailability among subjects calls for dose optimization. Melatonin was essentially safe for short-term use (up to 3 months). Long-term data available for Ped-PRM demonstrate fatigue (6.3%), somnolence (6.3%), and mood swings (4.2%) with no evidence of effects on height, BMI, or pubertal development, tolerance or withdrawal effects following long-term use of this product. Studies on long-term safety of IRM and oversight of melatonin supplement manufacture are warranted.
35285287|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Autistic people are more likely to have a gender identity which does not match their sex assigned at birth. Some people experience distress about their sex and gender not matching, which is called gender dysphoria. Such individuals may wish to attend a gender clinic to access healthcare support for gender dysphoria. Currently, there is limited evidence to help clinicians best support autistic people who need healthcare for gender dysphoria. We wanted to find out what healthcare clinicians think about working with autistic patients with gender dysphoria. We interviewed 16 clinicians who work in healthcare services with adults and young people who are autistic and experience gender dysphoria. We recorded the interviews and carefully analysed the content to find key themes. We found that clinicians worked with patients to try and better understand their experiences of gender dysphoria. Clinicians identified features of autism that they believed were related to gender identity and dysphoria including different thinking styles, social differences, and sensory sensitivities. Clinicians noticed that autistic people spoke about their gender in different ways to non-autistic people. Clinicians tried to adapt their practice to better meet the needs of their autistic patients. These adaptations tended to focus on differences in the assessment process, for example, offering longer or shorter appointments and changing their communication style. We conclude that clinicians were offering an individualised approach to autistic patients experiencing gender dysphoria. However, these clinicians were particularly interested in working with autistic people, and so may not be representative of the wider clinician population. Clinicians working in this area should receive training on autism adaptations and the intersection of autism and gender dysphoria.
35285280|a|OBJECTIVES: There is an increasing interest in combining psilocybin or methylenedioxymethamphetamine with psychological support in treating psychiatric disorders. Although there have been several recent systematic reviews, study and participant numbers have been limited, and the field is rapidly evolving with the publication of more studies. We therefore conducted a systematic review of PubMed, MEDLINE, PsycINFO, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, Embase, and CINAHL for randomised controlled trials of methylenedioxymethamphetamine and psilocybin with either inactive or active controls. METHODS: Outcomes were psychiatric symptoms measured by standardised, validated and internationally recognised instruments at least 2 weeks following drug administration, Quality was independently assessed using the Cochrane risk of bias assessment tool and Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation framework. RESULTS: There were eight studies on methylenedioxymethamphetamine and six on psilocybin. Diagnoses included post-traumatic stress disorder, long-standing/treatment-resistant depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder, social anxiety in adults with autism, and anxiety or depression in life-threatening disease. The most information and strongest association was for the change in methylenedioxymethamphetamine scores compared to active controls in post-traumatic stress disorder (k = 4; standardised mean difference = -0.86; 95% confidence interval = [-1.23, -0.50]; p < 0.0001). There were also small benefits for social anxiety in adults with autism. Psilocybin was superior to wait-list but not niacin (active control) in life-threatening disease anxiety or depression. It was equally as effective as escitalopram in long-standing depression for the primary study outcome and superior for most of the secondary outcomes in analyses uncorrected for multiple comparisons. Both agents were well tolerated in supervised trials. Trial quality varied with only small proportions of potential participants included in the randomised phase. Overall certainty of evidence was low or very low using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation framework. CONCLUSION: Methylenedioxymethamphetamine and psilocybin may show promise in highly selected populations when administered in closely supervised settings and with intensive support.
35285132|a|Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), including autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellectual disability (ID), are pervasive, often lifelong disorders, lacking evidence-based interventions for core symptoms. With no established biological markers, diagnoses are defined by behavioral criteria. Thus, preclinical in vivo animal models of NDDs must be optimally utilized. For this reason, experts in the field of behavioral neuroscience convened a workshop with the goals of reviewing current behavioral studies, reports, and assessments in rodent models. Goals included: (a) identifying the maximal utility and limitations of behavior in animal models with construct validity; (b) providing recommendations for phenotyping animal models; and (c) guidelines on how in vivo models should be used and reported reliably and rigorously while acknowledging their limitations. We concluded by recommending minimal criteria for reporting in manuscripts going forward. The workshop elucidated a consensus of potential solutions to several problems, including revisiting claims made about animal model links to ASD (and related conditions). Specific conclusions included: mice (or other rodent or preclinical models) are models of the neurodevelopmental insult, not specifically any disorder (e.g., ASD); a model that perfectly recapitulates a disorder such as ASD is untenable; and greater attention needs be given to validation of behavioral testing methods, data analysis, and critical interpretation.
35285131|a|DYRK1A haploinsufficiency syndrome is a well-established neurodevelopmental disorder, but detailed information on the range of cognitive and behavioral issues associated with the condition is limited. We studied 24 participants with likely pathogenic or pathogenic variants in DYRK1A through the Simons Searchlight study and systematically assessed their medical history and development using standardized instruments: Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale II (VABS-II) and Child Behavior Checklists/1.5-5 and 6-18 (CBCL/1.5-5, CBCL/6-18). All of the individuals in the cohort had neurological manifestations including intellectual disability or developmental delay, microcephaly, autism spectrum disorder, and/or seizures. The severity of the neurodevelopmental disorder was variable with a few children scoring in the moderately low range on the adaptive behavior composite score on the VABS-II. This study confirms the association of DYRK1A haploinsufficiency with neurodevelopmental disabilities, microcephaly, autism spectrum disorder, and epilepsy and quantifies the range of adaptive behaviors.
35284942|a|The 2016-2018 National Surveys of Children's Health dataset was used to identify associations among preventive care, unmet health care needs, medical home access, and emergency department (ED) use among children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Results indicated that youth with ASD had higher odds of using ED services if they had unmet mental health care needs (OR = 1.58, CI: 1.04-2.39) and lower odds of using ED services if they had access to a medical home (OR = 0.79, CI: 0.63-0.98). Findings suggest the importance of access to coordinated, comprehensive, and patient-centered care to address health care needs and prevent ED utilization among children and adolescents with ASD.
35284637|a|
35284636|a|Objective: To characterize pre-implementation organizational factors associated with Access To Tailored Autism Integrated Care (ATTAIN), an integrated care model for children with autism and identified or suspected co-occurring mental health needs. Methods: Pediatric primary care providers (n=36) completed surveys as part of a pilot study testing ATTAIN feasibility. Measures assessed: background characteristics; implementation climate; organizational readiness; evidence-based practice (EBP) attitudes; knowledge, confidence and comfort caring for children with autism. Results: Compared to providers from a network of primary care practices and an integrated healthcare system, providers from a Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) reported less positive perceptions of climate supportive of EBP implementation and, specifically, selection for openness and rewards for EBPs. Implementation climate was associated with autism knowledge, comfort with mental health referral and follow up, and organizational change efficacy. Conclusions: Findings advance understanding of pre-implementation organizational context factors important to assess for EBP implementation in diverse pediatric care settings.
35283803|a|Emotion recognition skills and the ability to understand the mental states of others are crucial for normal social functioning. Conversely, delays and impairments in these processes can have a profound impact on capability to engage in, maintain, and effectively regulate social interactions. Therefore, this study aimed to compare the performance of 42 autistic children (Mage = 8.25 years, SD = 2.22), 45 unaffected siblings (Mage = 8.65 years, SD = 2.40), and 41 typically developing (TD) controls (Mage = 8.56 years, SD = 2.35) on the Affect Recognition (AR) and Theory of Mind (TOM) subtests of the Developmental Neuropsychological Assessment Battery. There were no significant differences between siblings and TD controls. Autistic children showed significantly poorer performance on AR when compared to TD controls and on TOM when compared to both TD controls and unaffected siblings. An additional comparison of ASD, unaffected sibling and TD control subsamples, matched on full-scale IQ, revealed no group differences for either AR or TOM. AR and TOM processes have received less research attention in siblings of autistic children and remain less well characterized. Therefore, despite limitations, findings reported here contribute to our growing understanding of AR and TOM abilities in siblings of autistic children and highlight important future research directions.
35283744|a|The molecular mechanisms underlying learned vocal communication are not well characterized. This is a major barrier for developing treatments for conditions affecting social communication, such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Our group previously generated an activity-dependent gene expression network in the striatopallidal song control nucleus, Area X, in adult zebra finches to identify master regulators of learned vocal behavior. This dataset revealed that the two host genes for microRNA-128, ARPP21 and R3HDM1, are among the top genes whose expression correlates to how much birds sing. Here we examined whether miR-128 itself is behaviorally regulated in Area X and found that its levels decline with singing. We hypothesized that reducing miR-128 during the critical period for vocal plasticity would enhance vocal learning. To test this, we bilaterally injected an antisense miR-128 construct (AS miR-128) or a control scrambled sequence into Area X at post-hatch day 30 (30 d) using sibling-matched experimental and control pupils. The juveniles were then returned to their home cage and raised with their tutors. Strikingly, inhibition of miR-128 in young birds enhanced the organization of learned vocal sequences. Tutor and pupil stereotypy scores were positively correlated, though the correlation was stronger between tutors and control pupils compared to tutors and AS miR-128 pupils. This difference was driven by AS miR-128 pupils achieving higher stereotypy scores despite their tutors' lower syntax scores. AS miR-128 birds with tutors on the higher end of the stereotypy spectrum were more likely to produce songs with faster tempos relative to sibling controls. Our results suggest that low levels of miR-128 facilitate vocal sequence stereotypy. By analogy, reducing miR-128 could enhance the capacity to learn to speak in patients with non-verbal ASD. To our knowledge, this study is the first to directly link miR-128 to learned vocal communication and provides support for miR-128 as a potential therapeutic target for ASD.
35283396|a|Over the past 30 years or so, the body of research on autism spectrum disorders (ASD) in China has grown steadily. With the tireless efforts of government agencies and private organizations, the legitimate rights and interests of children with ASD have been initially guaranteed through a series of education and rehabilitation reforms, yet there are still many challenges to overcome. Many quality studies on the prevalence of ASD have been conducted in recent years, but China has lacked official census data until now. Moreover, there is a general lack of awareness of ASD even among the groups that directly interact with individuals with ASD, namely parents/caregivers, teachers, and doctors. Despite that fact, ASD should be brought to the attention of professionals and policymakers so that they can take appropriate measures, which include i) early comprehensive screening and diagnosis of ASD, ii) improvement of the corresponding policies and regulatory system, and iii) promotion of public awareness of ASD.
35283254|a|The lateral hypothalamus (LHA) is still a poorly understood brain region. Based on published Dlx and Gad gene expression patterns in the embryonic and adult hypothalamus respectively, three large areas are identified in the LHA. A central tuberal LHA region is already well described as it contains neurons producing the peptides melanin-concentrating hormone or hypocretin. This region is rich in GABAergic neurons and is specified by Dlx gene expression in the rodent embryo. Rostrally and caudally bordering the tuberal LHA, two Dlx-GAD-GABA poor regions are then easily delineated. The three regions show different organizational schema. The tuberal region is reticularly organized, connected with the cerebral cortex and the spinal cord, and its embryonic development occurs along the tractus postopticus. The region anterior to it is associated with the stria medullaris in both embryonic and adult subjects. The posterior LHA region is made of differentiated nuclei and includes the subthalamic nucleus. Therefore, the LHA is divided into three distinct parts: in addition to the well-known tuberal LHA, caudal and anterior LHA regions exist that have specific anatomical and functional characteristics. The hypothalamus is made up of several dozens of nuclei or areas that are more or less well differentiated and whose boundaries and arrangements are drawn differently according to authors and atlases (Allen Institute, 2004; Paxinos and Franklin, 2019; Paxinos and Watson, 2013; Swanson, 2004). The dominant hypothesis for more than 50 years is that these structures are distributed within three antero-posterior areas (anterior, tuberal, posterior) and more or less three longitudinal zones (lateral, medial and periventricular) (Fig. 1). In addition to these regions, several adjacent territories are often associated to the hypothalamus. The preoptic area is functionally related to the hypothalamus, but it is better seen as a telencephalic structure based on developmental data (Croizier et al., 2015; Puelles and Rubenstein, 2015). Lately, the zona incerta and the subthalamic nucleus (STN) have also been associated to the hypothalamus on the basis of their connections and development for the STN (Altman and Bayer, 1986; Barbier and Risold, 2021; Swaab et al., 2021). However, the zona incerta is still included in the 'pre-thalamus' or "ventral thalamus" in the embryo (Puelles and Rubenstein, 2015). Thus, the boundaries of the hypothalamus remain blurred around what we can call a 'core' made of the anterior to posterior regions (Brooks, 1988). In addition, unlike other large brain regions that are characterized early on by a molecular signature, i.e. by the embryonic expression of specific molecular markers, data illustrating the distribution of dozens of transcription factors involved in brain patterning and cell lineage specification confirmed the extremely heterogeneous and mosaic nature of the anterior and posterior regions of the hypothalamus (Alvarez-Bolado, 2019; Puelles et al., 2013; Puelles and Rubenstein, 2015). The rich nuclear organization of the medial and periventricular zones of the hypothalamus is consistent with the mosaic expression of developmental genes. The LHA, however, is often perceived as much more homogeneous in its cytoarchitectural organization. At the same time, there is little information regarding the expression of developmental genes in the anterior and posterior territories of the LHA. Most studies focus on the tuberal LHA which expresses many of these genes. Admittedly, even in the adult hypothalamus, the internal boundaries of the LHA are difficult to identify and the same is true in the embryo. Developmental data alone are insufficient to achieve a better understanding of the LHA anatomical organization and for this region as for medial and periventricular zones, a coherence must be established between development and adult anatomical organization. Among the most useful neurochemical markers to identify large regions of the forebrain, those involved in the identification of GABAergic and glutamatergic neurons have proven to be particularly efficient. Indeed, GABAergic neurons are not ubiquitously distributed. Large regions of the forebrain are rich in such cells, including the basal telencephalon, but others contain few or no GABAergic cells and are rich in glutamatergic neurons instead (for example the dorsal thalamus that is free of GABA-neurons in rodents). The same applies for the hypothalamus: several structures of the hypothalamus are free of GABAergic neurons, as, for example, the mammillary nuclei (Hahn et al., 2019). Recently, we also identified a GABA-poor posterior LHA territory that includes the (STN), and is localized caudal to the GABA-rich tuberal LHA (Barbier et al., 2020; Barbier and Risold, 2021; Chometton et al., 2016b). Therefore, the LHA seems partitioned into GABA-rich/GABA-poor regions. However, to define or confirm distinct neuroanatomical entities, these regions must have a specific embryological origin, and show specific hodological patterns and functions. Hence, the purpose of this short review is to identify divisions of the LHA based on developmental and neurochemical criteria. Such an analysis seems to us relevant in order to allow later functional studies on regions whose boundaries will be based on objective criteria.
35282518|a|A growing evidence base has implicated immune dysfunction in the etiology of some cases of autism spectrum disorder. The precise relationship between immune disorders and autism spectrum disorder remains unclear. Herein we report a 14-year-old-male with agammaglobulinemia, who was diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder, and who has received exogenous immunoglobulins regularly for most of his life. This case study supports current theories implicating antibody deficiencies in some individuals with an autism spectrum disorder. Our case will add to the growing literature of understanding the connection between immune deficiencies in the pathogenesis of autism.
35282248|a|Video games are popular and ubiquitous aspects of human culture, but their relationships to psychological and neurophysiological traits have yet to be analyzed in social-evolutionary frameworks. We examined the relationships of video game usage, motivations, and preferences with autistic and schizotypal traits and two aspects of neurophysiology, reaction time and targeting time. Participants completed the Autism Quotient, Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire, a Video Game Usage Questionnaire, and two neurophysiological tasks. We tested in particular the hypotheses, motivated by theory and previous work, that: (1) participants with higher autism scores would play video games more, and participants with higher schizotypy scores would play video games less; and (2) autism and positive schizotypy would be associated with opposite patterns of video game use, preferences and motivations. Females, but not males, with higher autism scores played more video games, and exhibited evidence of relatively male-typical video game genre preferences and motivations. By contrast, positive schizotypy was associated with reduced video game use in both genders, for several measures of game use frequency. In line with previous findings, males played video game more than females did overall, preferred action video games, and exhibited faster reaction and targeting times. Females preferred Puzzle and Social Simulation games. Faster reaction and targeting times were associated with gaming motives related to skill development and building behavior. These findings show that gaming use and patterns reflect aspects of psychology, and gender, related to social cognition and imagination, as well as aspects of neurophysiology. More generally, the results suggest that video game use is notably affected by levels of autistic and schizotypal traits, and that video games may provide an evolutionarily novel medium for imaginative play in which immersive play experiences can be decoupled from social interaction.
35281966|a|Background: To date, there have been no large-scale population studies of autistic traits (AUT) conducted in Africa. Aim: The study aimed to estimate the prevalence and characteristics of autism spectrum disorders in a large sample of Kenyan adolescents and young adults. Setting: Tertiary academic institutions (87%) and directly from the community (13%). Methods: Our study surveyed 8918 youths (aged 15-25 years) using the autism spectrum quotient (AQ). Based on AQ scores, we derived groups with low (L-AUT), borderline (B-AUT), and high (H-AUT) autistic traits. Relationships of AUT with demographic factors, psychosis, affectivity and stress were investigated. Results: Internal consistency of the AQ in the population was excellent (Cronbach's alpha = 0.91). Across all participants, 0.63% were estimated as having H-AUT, while 14.9% had B-AUT. Amongst community youth, prevalence of H-AUT was 0.98%. Compared to those with low and borderline traits, H-AUT participants were more likely to be males, to have lower personal and parental educational attainment, and to be of a lower socioeconomic status. The H-AUT group also had higher psychotic and affective symptoms as well as higher psychosocial stress than other groups. Conclusion: The prevalence of H-AUT amongst Kenyan youth is comparable to Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) rates in many countries. Autistic traits in Kenya are associated with worse social and clinical profiles. Further research on autism across Africa is needed to investigate cross-cultural heterogeneity of this disorder, and to guide healthcare policy.
35281701|a|Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a treatable condition that often requires specialist care, particularly when comorbid with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, specialist clinics are few and typically located in large medical centers. To increase availability of evidence-based treatment for OCD in individuals with ASD, we adapted an internet-delivered cognitive behavior therapy (ICBT) protocol to suit the needs of these individuals and conducted a feasibility study (N = 22). The primary outcome was the clinician-rated Children's Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (CY-BOCS), administered at pre- and post-treatment as well as 3 months after treatment. ICBT was deemed acceptable and was associated with clinically significant improvements in CY-BOCS scores, corresponding to a large within-group effect size (Cohen's d = 1.33). Similarly, significant improvements were observed in most of the secondary parent- and self-rated measures. Approximately 60% of the participants were classed as treatment responders and 50% were in remission from their OCD at the 3-month follow-up. To provide a meaningful benchmark, we also analyzed data from a specialist clinic that regularly treats individuals with comorbid OCD and ASD (N = 52). These analyses indicated that specialized in-person CBT produced significantly larger effects (d = 2.69) while being markedly more resource demanding, compared to ICBT. To conclude, ICBT can be successfully adapted to treat OCD in youth with ASD and may be a viable alternative for those who do not have direct access to highly specialized treatment. Further improvements of the treatment protocol based on participant and therapist feedback are warranted, as is a formal test of its efficacy and cost-effectiveness in a randomized controlled trial.
35281673|a|As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, individuals with neurodevelopmental disabilities (NDD) are engaging more with others in virtual group formats for social, educational, and professional reasons. This study extends prior research by evaluating the efficacy of common behavioral interventions, including behavioral skills training, provided via group video conferencing to teach skills that are important when interacting with others in a virtual format. Four adults with NDD were taught to use their cameras and microphones appropriately and to make encouraging statements to one another while discussing current events and social skills-based lessons via Zoom . Two of the three skills increased and maintained for all participants even after the experimenter faded the contingencies for appropriate responding. The third skill maintained after the experimenter arranged for the response to produce natural consequences. Tests for generalization across group leads and activities yielded promising results. Findings suggest that adults with NDD benefit from group-based telehealth services to improve skills needed to interact successfully with others in a virtual format.
35281599|a|Microcephaly (MCPH) is a developmental anomaly of the brain known by reduced cerebral cortex and underdeveloped intellectual disability without additional clinical symptoms. It is a genetically and clinically heterogenous disorder. Twenty-five genes (involved in spindle positioning, Wnt signaling, centriole biogenesis, DNA repair, microtubule dynamics, cell cycle checkpoints, and transcriptional regulation) causing MCPH have been identified so far. Pakistani population has contributed in the identification of many MCPH genes. WES of three large consanguineous families revealed three pathogenic variants of MCPH1, CENPJ, and CASK. One novel (c.1254delT) deletion variant of MCPH1 and one known (c.18delC) deletion variant of CENPJ were identified in family 1 and 2, respectively. In addition to this, we also identified a missense variant (c.1289G>A) of CASK in males individuals in family 3. Missense mutation in the CASK gene is frequent in the boys with intellectual disability and autistic traits which are the common features that are associated with FG Syndrome 4. The study reports novel and reported mutant alleles disrupting the working of genes vital for normal brain functioning. The findings of this study enhance our understanding about the genetic architecture of primary microcephaly in our local pedigrees and add to the allelic heterogeneity of 3 known MCPH genes. The data generated will help to develop specific strategies to reduce the high incidence rate of MCPH in Pakistani population.
35280969|a|Background: Little is known about the educational experiences of children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) in the Kenyan Coastal context. Objectives: We examined the diagnostic and placement procedures used in education on the Kenyan coastal region. In addition, we investigated the education-related challenges faced by children with ASD. Methods: We conducted focus group discussions and in-depth interviews with 21 participants, including teachers, clinicians and educational administrators. Data were analysed using an inductive thematic framework on qualitative data analysis software, NVIVO 10. Results: The findings from this study indicate that there were no systematic approaches to diagnosing children as having ASD. Teachers reported experiencing many challenges, including a lack of specialised training, inadequate resources and difficulty in managing children with different functional abilities in one class. Conclusion: There is an urgent need for contextually relevant evidence-based identification, placement and management services to be put in place to meet the educational needs of children with ASD.
35280173|a|Recent advances in longitudinal methodologies for observational studies have contributed to a better understanding of Autism as a neurodevelopmental condition characterized by within-person and between-person variability over time across behavioral domains. However, this finer-grained approach to the study of developmental variability has yet to be applied to Autism intervention science. The widely adopted experimental designs in the field-randomized control trials and quasi-experimental designs-hold value for inferring treatment effects; at the same time, they are limited in elucidating what works for whom, why, and when, given the idiosyncrasies of neurodevelopmental disorders where predictors and outcomes are often dynamic in nature. This perspective paper aims to serve as a primer for Autism intervention scientists to rethink the way we approach predictors of treatment response and treatment-related change using a dynamic lens. We discuss several empirical gaps, and potential methodological challenges and opportunities pertaining to: (1) capturing finer-grained treatment effects in specific behavioral domains as indexed by micro-level within-person changes during and beyond intervention; and (2) examining and modeling dynamic prediction of treatment response. Addressing these issues can contribute to enhanced study designs and methodologies that generate evidence to inform the development of more personalized interventions and stepped care approaches for individuals on the heterogeneous spectrum of Autism with changing needs across development.
35280167|a|Prenatal exposure to valproic acid (VPA) is a risk factor for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in humans and it induces autistic-like behaviors in rodents. Imbalances between GABAergic and glutamatergic neurotransmission and increased oxidative stress together with altered glutathione (GSH) metabolism have been hypothesized to play a role in both VPA-induced embriotoxicity and in human ASD. N-acetylcysteine (NAC) is an antioxidant precursor of glutathione and a modulator of glutamatergic neurotransmission that has been tested in ASD, although the clinical studies currently available provided controversial results. Here, we explored the effects of repeated NAC (150 mg/kg) administration on core autistic-like features and altered brain GSH metabolism in the VPA (500 mg/kg) rat model of ASD. Furthermore, we measured the mRNA expression of genes encoding for scaffolding and transcription regulation proteins, as well as the subunits of NMDA and AMPA receptors and metabotropic glutamate receptors mGLUR1 and mGLUR5 in brain areas that are relevant to ASD. NAC administration ameliorated the social deficit displayed by VPA-exposed rats in the three-chamber test, but not their stereotypic behavior in the hole board test. Furthermore, NAC normalized the altered GSH levels displayed by these animals in the hippocampus and nucleus accumbens, and it partially rescued the altered expression of post-synaptic terminal network genes found in VPA-exposed rats, such as NR2a, MGLUR5, GLUR1, and GLUR2 in nucleus accumbens, and CAMK2, NR1, and GLUR2 in cerebellum. These data indicate that NAC treatment selectively mitigates the social dysfunction displayed by VPA-exposed rats normalizing GSH imbalance and reestablishing the expression of genes related to synaptic function in a brain region-specific manner. Taken together, these data contribute to clarify the behavioral impact of NAC in ASD and the molecular mechanisms that underlie its effects.
35280162|a|Hypospadias is one of the most common congenital malformations in boys. Due to abnormal appearance in the penis with abnormal urination and erection, patients with hypospadias were vulnerable to suffering from stress and psychiatric difficulties. The present study aims to summarize all the current evidence of the association between hypospadias and the risk of psychiatric disorders by a comprehensive review. Seventeen clinical studies were identified in the four electronic databases. A total of 953,872 participants were involved, while 15,729 of them were hypospadiac patients and the remaining 938,143 were normal controls. The standard age for surgery for hypospadias ranged from 20.4 months to 21.5 years. Eight out of seventeen (8/17, 47%) included studies explicitly showed that patients with hypospadias had a significantly higher risk of psychosocial disorders (all P < 0.05). Specific types of psychiatric disorders included depression, anxiety, shyness, timidness, isolation, fear of ridicule, attention-deficit hyperactivity, autism spectrum, behavioral/emotional disorders, temper tantrums, emotionality, affective, psychosexual problems, and suicidal tendencies. Based on this review, psychiatric illnesses are frequently detected in hypospadiac patients' childhood, thus proper psychiatric guidance and early interventions from physicians, nurses, and parents may help these children to grow into less affected men.
35279764|a|The demand of social skills interventions for people with ASD has grown in recent years. The main goal of this research was to study social skills: "responding to interaction" and "initiating interaction", and to capture whether there were differences between an initial and a final session in a program for children with ASD. Additionally, we aimed to compare social skills patterns according to the VIQ level. The sample (N = 20) was divided into 2 subgroups depending on whether the VIQ was > 90 or < 90. We employed a mixed methods approach based on a systematic observation of social behaviors. The observational design was nomothetic, follow-up, and multidimensional. Once we confirmed inter-observer reliability for the ad hoc observational instrument we performed descriptive statistics and polar coordinate analysis using LINCE software. The results show high intragroup and intergroup variability. In general, participants with VIQ < 90 showed a better improvement in responding to interaction, whereas participants with VIQ > 90 showed more complex patterns to initiate interactions. The polar coordinate technique was useful for detecting significant relationships between autism's social micro-behaviors. Results and information obtained through observational methodology could allow professionals to understand communication and interaction of participants.
35279744|a|The Forkhead box P2 (FOXP2) encodes for a transcription factor with a broad role in embryonic development. It is especially represented among GWAS hits for neurodevelopmental disorders and related traits, including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism spectrum disorder, neuroticism, and risk-taking behaviors. While several functional studies are underway to understand the consequences of FOXP2 variation, this study aims to expand previous findings to clinically and genetically related phenotypes and neuroanatomical features among subjects with ADHD. The sample included 407 adults with ADHD and 463 controls. Genotyping was performed on the Infinium PsychArray-24 BeadChip, and the FOXP2 gene region was extracted. A gene-wide approach was adopted to evaluate the combined effects of FOXP2 variants (n = 311) on ADHD status, severity, comorbidities, and personality traits. Independent risk variants presenting potential functional effects were further tested for association with cortical surface areas in a subsample of cases (n = 87). The gene-wide analyses within the ADHD sample showed a significant association of the FOXP2 gene with harm avoidance (P = 0.001; PFDR = 0.015) and nominal associations with hyperactivity symptoms (P = 0.026; PFDR = 0.130) and antisocial personality disorder (P = 0.026; PFDR = 0.130). An insertion/deletion variant (rs79622555) located downstream of FOXP2 was associated with the three outcomes and nominally with the surface area of superior parietal and anterior cingulate cortices. Our results extend and refine previous GWAS findings pointing to a role of FOXP2 in several neurodevelopment-related phenotypes, mainly those involving underlying symptomatic domains of self-regulation and inhibitory control. Taken together, the available evidence may constitute promising insights into the puzzle of the FOXP2-related pathophysiology.
35279678|a|Zebrafish are highly social teleost fish and an excellent model to study social behavior. The neuropeptide Oxytocin is associated different social behaviors as well as disorders resulting in social impairment like autism spectrum disorder. However, how Oxytocin receptor signaling affects the development and expression kinetics of social behavior is not known. In this study we investigated the role of the two oxytocin receptors, Oxtr and Oxtrl, in the development and maintenance of social preference and shoaling behavior in 2- to 8-week-old zebrafish. Using CRISPR/Cas9 mediated oxtr and oxtrl knock-out fish, we found that the development of social preference is accelerated if one of the Oxytocin receptors is knocked-out and that the knock-out fish reach significantly higher levels of social preference. Moreover, oxtr-/- fish showed impairments in the maintenance of social preference. Social isolation prior to testing led to impaired maintenance of social preference in both wild-type and oxtr and oxtrl knock-out fish. Knocking-out either of the Oxytocin receptors also led to increased group spacing and reduced polarization in a 20-fish shoal at 8 weeks post fertilization, but not at 4. These results show that the development and maintenance of social behavior is influenced by the Oxytocin receptors and that the effects are not just pro- or antisocial, but dependent on both the age and social context of the fish.
35279072|a|BACKGROUND: There is substantial variability in adaptive skills among individuals with Down syndrome. Few studies, however, have focused on the early developmental period or on the potential sources of variability in adaptive skills. This study characterizes adaptive skills in young children with Down syndrome and investigates child characteristics associated with adaptive skills. METHODS: Participants were 44 children with Down syndrome ranging in age from 2.50 to 7.99 years (M = 4.66 years, SD = 1.46). The Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales-3 (VABS-3) Comprehensive Interview Form was used to assess adaptive behavior in the three core domains: socialization, daily living, and communication skills. Caregivers also reported on motor skills and autism spectrum disorder symptoms. Child cognitive abilities were assessed. RESULTS: Analyses comparing mean standard score performance across the three VABS-3 core domains demonstrated significant differences between all pairs of domains, resulting in a group-level pattern of socialization > daily living > communication skills. At the individual level, 10 different patterns of relative strength and weakness were identified, with only 18% of participants evidencing significant differences between adaptive skill domain standard scores corresponding to the group-level pattern of significant differences. Child characteristics (cognitive abilities, motor skills, and autism spectrum disorder symptoms) were significantly associated with VABS-3 adaptive domain standard scores. CONCLUSION: These findings underscore the importance of individualizing intervention programs focused on improving the adaptive skills of young children with Down syndrome based on consideration of the child's relative adaptive strengths and weaknesses.
35278167|a|In this study, we aimed to compare the early literacy skills and home literacy environment (HLE) of children on the autism spectrum and typically developing (TD) children, and to determine the predictors of early literacy skills in children on the autism spectrum. The sample in this study consisted of 30 children on the autism spectrum and 31 TD children whose receptive language ages were matched. Results indicated that children on the autism spectrum had significantly higher letter knowledge and significantly lower phonological awareness and vocabulary compared with TD children. No significant difference was found between the groups in terms of the HLE. Moreover, nonverbal cognitive ability predicted letter knowledge, and language and working memory predicted both vocabulary and phonological awareness.
35278166|a|Parents of children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) express concern about raising their children bilingually, and often hear advice from professionals against the use of bilingualism. The current study examined the relation between bilingualism and the language and social communication skills of toddlers diagnosed with ASD (N = 353) in the US, while controlling for socioeconomic risk factors. Structural equation modeling showed no differences in language skills between bilingual Spanish-English speaking children and monolingual English-speaking (p = .596) or monolingual Spanish-speaking (p = .963) children and showed a bilingual advantage on socialization skills when comparing bilingual and monolingual English-speaking children (p = .001). Parents of autistic children exposed to Spanish and English should be encouraged to raise their child bilingually if it best suits familial needs.
35278165|a|The Eyberg Child Behavior Inventory (ECBI) is a frequently used measure to assess interfering behaviors in children and psychometric properties have recently been examined in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). There is a need to confirm the identified factors and examine the factor structure in a racially/ethnically diverse, community-based sample. The current study conducts a psychometric analysis of the ECBI in a sample of children with ASD receiving publicly-funded mental health services. Data were collected from 201 children with ASD ages 5-13 years (60% Hispanic/Latinx) participating in a community effectiveness trial. Confirmatory factor analysis indicated poor model fit using previously identified factors and a new four-factor solution was identified. Clinical and research implications of these findings are discussed.
35277549|a|Few clinically validated biomarkers of ASD exist which can rapidly, accurately, and objectively identify autism during the first years of life and be used to support optimized treatment outcomes and advances in precision medicine. As such, the goal of the present study was to leverage both simple and computationally-advanced approaches to validate an eye-tracking measure of social attention preference, the GeoPref Test, among 1,863 ASD, delayed, or typical toddlers (12-48 months) referred from the community or general population via a primary care universal screening program. Toddlers participated in diagnostic and psychometric evaluations and the GeoPref Test: a 1-min movie containing side-by-side dynamic social and geometric images. Following testing, diagnosis was denoted as ASD, ASD features, LD, GDD, Other, typical sibling of ASD proband, or typical. Relative to other diagnostic groups, ASD toddlers exhibited the highest levels of visual attention towards geometric images and those with especially high fixation levels exhibited poor clinical profiles. Using the 69% fixation threshold, the GeoPref Test had 98% specificity, 17% sensitivity, 81% PPV, and 65% NPV. Sensitivity increased to 33% when saccades were included, with comparable validity across sex, ethnicity, or race. The GeoPref Test was also highly reliable up to 24 months following the initial test. Finally, fixation levels among twins concordant for ASD were significantly correlated, indicating that GeoPref Test performance may be genetically driven. As the GeoPref Test yields few false positives (~ 2%) and is equally valid across demographic categories, the current findings highlight the ability of the GeoPref Test to rapidly and accurately detect autism before the 2nd birthday in a subset of children and serve as a biomarker for a unique ASD subtype in clinical trials.
35277138|a|BACKGROUND: In this case report, we described the past history, clinical manifestations, genetic characteristics and cognitive evaluation of a boy with congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA) who developed autism spectrum disorder (ASD). CASE PRESENTATION: The boy had an early onset of CIPA at the age of 48 months, and was later diagnosed with ASD at 5 years old. Developmental delays in communication, social skills and the presence of maladaptive behaviors were observed in the patient. Professional treatments significantly improved the developmental delays. CONCLUSIONS: This case demonstrated that ASD may develop in children with CIPA, and pediatricians should be aware that if they suspect or identify a child with CIPA that they should also be screened for ASD using similar examination and diagnostic tools as shown in the present report. Moreover, therapeutic interventions for ASD was helpful for the remission of both diseases.
35276971|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) consist of a range of neurodevelopmental conditions accompanied by dysbiosis of gut microbiota. Therefore, a number of microbiota manipulation strategies were developed to restore their balance. However, a comprehensive comparison of the various methods on gut microbiota is still lacking. Here, we evaluated the effect of Bifidobacterium (BF) treatment and fecal microbiota transplantation (FT) on gut microbiota in a propionic acid (PPA) rat model of autism using 16S rRNA sequencing. Following PPA treatment, gut microbiota showed depletion of Bacteroidia and Akkermansia accompanied by a concomitant increase of Streptococcus, Lachnospiraceae, and Paraeggerthella. The dysbiosis was predicted to cause increased levels of porphyrin metabolism and impairments of acyl-CoA thioesterase and ubiquinone biosynthesis. On the contrary, BF and FT treatments resulted in a distinct increase of Clostridium, Bifidobacterium, Marvinbryantia, Butyricicoccus, and Dorea. The taxa in BF group positively correlated with vitamin B12 and flagella biosynthesis, while FT mainly enriched flagella biosynthesis. In contrast, BF and FT treatments negatively correlated with succinate biosynthesis, pyruvate metabolism, nitrogen metabolism, beta-Lactam resistance, and peptidoglycan biosynthesis. Therefore, the present study demonstrated that BF and FT treatments restored the PPA-induced dysbiosis in a treatment-specific manner.
35276821|a|The alteration of the microbiota-gut-brain axis has been recently recognized as a critical modulator of neuropsychiatric health and a possible factor in the etiopathogenesis of autism spectrum disorders (ASD). This systematic review offers practitioners an overview of the potential therapeutic options to modify dysbiosis, GI symptoms, and ASD severity by modulating the microbiota-gut-brain axis in ASD, taking into consideration limits and benefits from current findings. Comprehensive searches of PubMed, Scopus, the Web of Science Core Collection, and EMBASE were performed from 2000 to 2021, crossing terms referred to ASD and treatments acting on the microbiota-gut-brain axis. A total of 1769 publications were identified, of which 19 articles met the inclusion criteria. Data were extracted independently by two reviewers using a preconstructed form. Despite the encouraging findings, considering the variability of the treatments, the samples size, the duration of treatment, and the tools used to evaluate the outcome of the examined trials, these results are still partial. They do not allow to establish a conclusive beneficial effect of probiotics and other interventions on the symptoms of ASD. In particular, the optimal species, subspecies, and dosages have yet to be identified. Considering the heterogeneity of ASD, double-blind, randomized, controlled trials and treatment tailored to ASD characteristics and host-microbiota are recommended.
35276298|a|Emerging evidence from reviews suggests that analgesic drug exposure during pregnancy may contribute to child neurodevelopment outcomes. A comprehensive overview of existing evidence is needed for firm conclusions to inform clinical guidelines. This umbrella review aims to synthesise high-quality evidence on prenatal analgesic drug exposure and risk of ASD and ADHD in children. Seven databases were searched from inception to May 2021 to identify relevant reviews of any design. The AMSTAR 2 and the GRADE quality assessments were used to evaluate risk of bias and heterogeneity. A narrative synthesis approach was used to summarise findings. Five systematic reviews and meta-analyses met the inclusion criteria. All reviews reported significant associations between maternal prenatal acetaminophen use and ADHD outcomes (risk ratio range: 1.08-1.34; no pooled incidence rate), with a potential dose-dependent relationship. Potential sources of heterogeneity included usage timing and dosage. Findings suggest minimisation of prenatal acetaminophen exposure due to risk for ADHD outcomes. Future studies should include assessing potentially interacting mechanisms associating acetaminophen use with future neurodevelopmental outcomes.
35275514|a|AIMS: Labour market marginalisation (LMM), i.e. severe problems in finding and keeping a job, is common among young adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). This study aimed to disentangle the extent of LMM as well as the heterogeneity in patterns of LMM among young adults with ADHD and what characterises those belonging to these distinct trajectories of LMM. METHODS: This population-based register study investigated all 6287 young adults, aged 22-29 years, who had their first primary or secondary diagnosis of ADHD in Sweden between 2006 and 2011. Group-based trajectory (GBT) models were used to estimate trajectories of LMM, conceptualised as both unemployment and work disability, 3 years before and 5 years after the year of an incident diagnosis of ADHD. Odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the association between individual characteristics and the trajectory groups of LMM were estimated by multinomial logistic regression. RESULTS: Six distinct trajectories of LMM were found: 'increasing high' (21% belonged to this trajectory group) with high levels of LMM throughout the study period, 'rapidly increasing' (19%), 'moderately increasing' (21%), 'constant low' (12%) with low levels of LMM throughout the study period, 'moderately decreasing' (14%) and finally 'fluctuating' (13%), following a reversed u-shaped curve. Individuals with the following characteristics had an increased probability of belonging to trajectory groups of increasing LMM: low educational level (moderately increasing: OR: 1.4; CI: 1.2-1.8, rapidly increasing: OR: 1.7; CI: 1.3-2.1, increasing high: OR: 2.9; CI: 2.3-3.6), single parents (moderately increasing: OR: 1.6; CI: 1.1-2.4, rapidly increasing: OR: 2.0; CI: 1.3-3.0), those born outside the European Union/the Nordic countries (rapidly increasing: OR: 1.7; CI: 1.1-2.5, increasing high: OR: 2.1; CI: 1.4-3.1), persons living in small cities/villages (moderately increasing: OR: 2.4; CI: 1.9-3.0, rapidly increasing: OR: 2.1; CI: 1.6-2.7, increasing high: OR: 2.6; CI: 2.0-3.3) and those with comorbid mental disorders, most pronounced regarding schizophrenia/psychoses (rapidly increasing: OR: 6.7; CI: 2.9-19.5, increasing high: OR: 12.8; CI: 5.5-37.0), autism spectrum disorders (rapidly increasing: OR: 4.6; CI: 3.1-7.1, increasing high: OR: 9.6; CI: 6.5-14.6), anxiety/stress-related disorders (moderately increasing: OR: 1.3; CI: 1.1-1.7, rapidly increasing: OR: 2.0; CI: 1.6-2.5, increasing high: OR: 1.8; CI: 1.5-2.3) and depression/bipolar disorder (moderately increasing: OR: 1.3; CI: 1.0-1.6, rapidly increasing: OR: 1.7; CI: 1.4-2.2, increasing high: OR: 1.5; CI: 1.2-1.9). CONCLUSIONS: About 61% of young adults were characterised by increasing LMM after a diagnosis of ADHD. To avoid marginalisation, attention should especially be given to young adults diagnosed with ADHD with a low educational level, that are single parents and who are living outside big cities. Also, young adults with comorbid mental disorders should be monitored for LMM early in working life.
35275394|a|INTRODUCTION: The state of emergency and national lockdown declared in Spain over the coronavirus pandemic markedly impaired routines and access towards health services supports for children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). This population is of particular vulnerability towards sudden changes and is distinguished by their complex management. OBJECTIVES: The main goal was to qualitatively assess the psychosocial and mental state of children diagnosed with ASD affiliated to the Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, during and after the first lockdown period. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A survey was administered to relatives of 65 boys and girls with a main diagnosis of ASD. RESULTS: A worsening of key A symptoms was reported during lockdown. In addition, the use of new technologies, intake between meals, and anxiety symptoms increased. Recovery after lockdown was not complete in our sample. CONCLUSIONS: These results highlight the need for planning specific supports for minors with ASD and for resources to reverse the effects on routines, habits, and school returnal.
35275183|a|Recent advances in human genetics identified genetic variants involved in causing autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). Mouse models that mimic mutations found in patients with ASD exhibit behavioral phenotypes consistent with ASD symptoms. These mouse models suggest critical biological factors of ASD etiology. Another important implication of ASD genetics is the enrichment of ASD risk genes in molecules involved in developing synapses and regulating neural circuit function. Sophisticated in vivo imaging technologies applied to ASD mouse models identify common synaptic impairments in the neocortex, with genetic-mutation-specific defects in local neural circuits. In this article, we review synapse- and circuit-level phenotypes identified by in vivo two-photon imaging in multiple mouse models of ASD and discuss the contributions of altered synapse properties and neural circuit activity to ASD pathogenesis.
35275169|a|Importance: Early identification of children on the autism spectrum is crucial to facilitate access to early supports and services for children and families. The need for improved early autism identification tools is highlighted by the lack of sufficient diagnostic accuracy in current tools. Objectives: To examine the diagnostic accuracy of the Social Attention and Communication Surveillance-Revised (SACS-R) and SACS-Preschool (SACS-PR) tools when used with a large, community-based, convenience sample and identify the prevalence of autism in this sample. Design, Setting, and Participants: This diagnostic accuracy study was conducted in Melbourne, Australia, training maternal and child health nurses who monitored 13 511 children aged 11 to 42 months using the SACS-R and SACS-PR during their routine consultations (June 1, 2013, to July 31, 2018). Children identified as being at high likelihood for autism (12-24 months of age: n = 327; 42 months of age: n = 168) and at low likelihood for autism plus concerns (42 months of age: n = 28) were referred by their maternal and child health nurse for diagnostic assessment by the study team. Data analysis was performed from April 13, 2020, to November 29, 2021. Exposures: Children were monitored with SACS-R and SACS-PR at 12, 18, 24, and 42 months of age. Main Outcomes and Measures: Diagnostic accuracy of the SACS-R and SACS-PR was determined by comparing children's likelihood for autism with their diagnostic outcome using clinical judgment based on standard autism assessments (Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule-Second Edition and Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised). Results: A total of 13 511 children (female: 6494 [48.1%]; male: 7017 [51.9%]) were monitored at least once with the SACS-R at their 12-, 18-, and 24-month-old routine maternal and child health consultations (mean [SD] age, 12.3 [0.59] months at 12 months; 18.3 [0.74] months at 18 months; 24.6 [1.12] months at 24 months) and followed up at their 42-month maternal and child health consultation (mean [SD] age, 44.0 [2.74] months) with SACS-PR (8419 [62.3%]). At 12 to 24 months, SACS-R showed high diagnostic accuracy, with 83% positive predictive value (95% CI, 0.77-0.87) and 99% estimated negative predictive value (95% CI, 0.01-0.02). Specificity (99.6% [95% CI, 0.99-1.00]) was high, with modest sensitivity (62% [95% CI, 0.57-0.66]). When the SACS-PR 42-month assessment was added, estimated sensitivity increased to 96% (95% CI, 0.94-0.98). Autism prevalence was 2.0% (1 in 50) between 11 and 30 months of age and 3.3% (1 in 31) between 11 and 42 months of age. Conclusions and Relevance: The SACS-R with SACS-PR (SACS-R+PR) had high diagnostic accuracy for the identification of autism in a community-based sample of infants, toddlers, and preschoolers, indicating the utility of early autism developmental surveillance from infancy to the preschool period rather than 1-time screening. Its greater accuracy compared with psychometrics of commonly used autism screening tools when used in community-based samples suggests that the SACS-R+PR can be used universally for the early identification of autism.
35275164|a|Importance: Polysubstance use among pregnant women has increased because of the opioid epidemic and the increasing legalization of cannabis along with persistent tobacco and alcohol consumption. Previous research on prenatal substance use and the child's risk of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) has mostly focused on single-substance exposures; simultaneous examination of multiple substance use and assessment of their synergistic health consequences is needed. Objectives: To assess the consequences of the use of specific substances during pregnancy, investigate whether the interaction of multiple prenatal substance exposures is associated with increases in the risk of childhood ADHD, and estimate the aggregate burden of polysubstance exposure during gestation. Design, Setting, and Participants: This cohort study analyzed data from the Boston Birth Cohort from 1998 to 2019. The sample of the present study comprised a multiethnic urban cohort of mother-child pairs who were predominantly low income. A total of 3138 children who were enrolled shortly after birth at Boston Medical Center were included and followed up from age 6 months to 21 years. Exposures: Substance use during pregnancy was identified based on self-reported tobacco smoking, alcohol consumption, and use of cannabis, cocaine, or opioids in any trimester of pregnancy. Diagnostic codes for neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome or neonatal abstinence syndrome from the International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, and the International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision, were also used to identify opioid exposure during gestation. Main Outcomes and Measures: ADHD diagnosis in the child's electronic medical record. Results: Among 3138 children (1583 boys [50.4%]; median age, 12 years [IQR, 9-14 years]; median follow-up, 10 years [IQR, 7-12 years]) in the final analytic sample, 486 (15.5%) had an ADHD diagnosis and 2652 (84.5%) were neurotypical. The median postnatal follow-up duration was 12 years (IQR, 9-14 years). Among mothers, 46 women (1.5%) self-identified as Asian (non-Pacific Islander), 701 (22.3%) as Hispanic, 1838 (58.6%) as non-Hispanic Black, 227 (7.2%) as non-Hispanic White, and 326 (10.4%) as other races and/or ethnicities (including American Indian or Indigenous, Cape Verdean, Pacific Islander, multiracial, other, or unknown). A total of 759 women (24.2%) reported the use of at least 1 substance during pregnancy, with tobacco being the most frequently reported (580 women [18.5%]). Cox proportional hazards models revealed that opioid exposure (60 children) had the highest adjusted hazard ratio (HR) for ADHD (2.19; 95% CI, 1.10-4.37). After including main statistical effects of all individual substances in an elastic net regression model, the HR of opioids was reduced to 1.60, and evidence of a statistical interaction between opioids and both cannabis and alcohol was found, producing 1.42 and 1.15 times higher risk of ADHD, respectively. The interaction between opioids and smoking was also associated with a higher risk of ADHD (HR, 1.17). Conclusions and Relevance: The findings of this study suggest that it is important to consider prenatal concurrent exposure to multiple substances and their possible interactions when counseling women regarding substance use during pregnancy, the future risk of ADHD for their children, and strategies for cessation and treatment programs.
35274789|a|Scanning young children while they watch short, engaging, commercially-produced movies has emerged as a promising approach for increasing data retention and quality. Movie stimuli also evoke a richer variety of cognitive processes than traditional experiments, allowing the study of multiple aspects of brain development simultaneously. However, because these stimuli are uncontrolled, it is unclear how effectively distinct profiles of brain activity can be distinguished from the resulting data. Here we develop an approach for identifying multiple distinct subject-specific Regions of Interest (ssROIs) using fMRI data collected during movie-viewing. We focused on the test case of higher-level visual regions selective for faces, scenes, and objects. Adults (N = 13) were scanned while viewing a 5.6-min child-friendly movie, as well as a traditional localizer experiment with blocks of faces, scenes, and objects. We found that just 2.7 min of movie data could identify subject-specific face, scene, and object regions. While successful, movie-defined ssROIS still showed weaker domain selectivity than traditional ssROIs. Having validated our approach in adults, we then used the same methods on movie data collected from 3 to 12-year-old children (N = 122). Movie response timecourses in 3-year-old children's face, scene, and object regions were already significantly and specifically predicted by timecourses from the corresponding regions in adults. We also found evidence of continued developmental change, particularly in the face-selective posterior superior temporal sulcus. Taken together, our results reveal both early maturity and functional change in face, scene, and object regions, and more broadly highlight the promise of short, child-friendly movies for developmental cognitive neuroscience.
35274543|a|AIM: When treating patients with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) the doctor-patient relationship can be very challenging. The dentist is often forced to work under general anaesthesia or conscious sedation. Children with ASD are patients with an increased risk of caries due to poor oral hygiene, a cariogenic diet and the use of xerostomal drugs. In this work therapeutic strategies used to treat this kind of patients are evaluated and a new method to treat children with ASD is presented in order to increase awareness about this condition in the dental field. METHODS: The Atlas Center (a non-profit organisation in Peurgia, Italy) has developed a software, called paINTeraction, that allows these special children to immerse themselves in a virtual reality with the help of an operator. Through this system the child can explore the dental office (and all its sounds and noises) before the real dental visit, thus connecting to the dental professional, achieving greater compliance and reducing anxiety. CONCLUSION: paINTeraction, with the use of digital technology tools, may be particularly well suited to introduce patients to the therapeutic environment, particularly in the dental setting.
35274482|a|
35274469|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by social cognition deficits, including difficulties inferring the intentions of others. Although deficits in attribution of intentions (AI) have been consistently replicated in ASD, their exact nature remains unexplored. Here we registered the electrophysiological correlates of a nonverbal social cognition task to investigate AI in autistic adults. Twenty-one male autistic adults and 30 male neurotypical volunteers performed a comic strips task depicting either intentional action (AI) or physical causality with or without human characters, while their electroencephalographic signal was recorded. Compared to neurotypical volunteers, autistic participants were significantly less accurate in correctly identifying congruence in the AI condition, but not in the physical causality conditions. In the AI condition a bilateral posterior positive event-related potential (ERP) occurred 200-400 ms post-stimulus (the ERP intention effect) in both groups. This waveform comprised a P200 and a P300 component, with the P200 component being larger for the AI condition in neurotypical volunteers but not in autistic individuals, who also showed a longer latency for this waveform. Group differences in amplitude of the ERP intention effect only became evident when we compared autistic participants to a subgroup of similarly performing neurotypical participants, suggesting that the atypical ERP waveform in ASD is an effect of group, rather than a marker of low-task performance. Together, these results suggest that the lower accuracy of the ASD group in the AI task may result from impaired early attentional processing and contextual integration of socially relevant cues. LAY SUMMARY: To understand why autistic people have difficulties in inferring others' intentions, we asked participants to judge the congruence of the endings of comic strips depicting either intentional actions (e.g., fetching a chair to reach for something) or situations solely following physical rules (e.g., an apple falling on someone's head), while their electrical brain activity was recorded. Autistic individuals had more difficulties in inferring intentions than neurotypical controls, which may reflect impaired attention and contextual integration of social cues.
35274462|a|Angelman syndrome (AS) is a genetic neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by developmental delay, lack of speech, seizures, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor coordination deficits. Motor abilities are an important outcome measure in AS as they comprise a broad repertoire of metrics including ataxia, hypotonia, delayed ambulation, crouched gait, and poor posture, and motor dysfunction affects nearly every individual with AS. Guided by collaborative work with AS clinicians studying gait, the goal of this study was to perform an in-depth gait analysis using the automated treadmill assay, DigiGait. Our hypothesis is that gait presents a strong opportunity for a reliable, quantitative, and translational metric that can serve to evaluate novel pharmacological, dietary, and genetic therapies. In this study, we used an automated gait analysis system, in addition to standard motor behavioral assays, to evaluate components of motor, exploration, coordination, balance, and gait impairments across the lifespan in an AS mouse model. Our study demonstrated marked global motoric deficits in AS mice, corroborating previous reports. Uniquely, this is the first report of nuanced aberrations in quantitative spatial and temporal components of gait in AS mice compared to sex- and age-matched wildtype littermates followed longitudinally using metrics that are analogous in AS individuals. Our findings contribute evidence toward the use of nuanced motor outcomes (i.e., gait) as valuable and translationally powerful metrics for therapeutic development for AS, as well as other genetic neurodevelopmental syndromes. LAY SUMMARY: Movement disorders affect nearly every individual with Angelman Syndrome (AS). The most common motor problems include spasticity, ataxia of gait (observed in the majority of ambulatory individuals), tremor, and muscle weakness. This report focused on quantifying various spatial and temporal aspects of gait as a reliable, translatable outcome measure in a preclinical AS model longitudinally across development. By increasing the number of translational, reliable, functional outcome measures in our wheelhouse, we will create more opportunities for identifying and advancing successful medical interventions.
35273852|a|It has long been recognized that the biological underpinnings of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and schizophrenia spectrum disorder (SSD) may share a common basis; however, the two conditions remain separate in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM-5) due to a few distinguishing characteristics. Both disorders are characterized by cognitive and social deficits and have been presumed to be linked to multiple genes. We describe a 46-year-old male who presented atypically with three previous and one current episode of schizoaffective-like symptoms. We describe his previous inpatient admissions, current inpatient course, psychological test results, and treatment. The patient initially presented with schizoaffective disorder, but with a thorough interview, collateral information review, and psychological evaluation, it was determined that he instead was presenting with a previously undiagnosed case of ASD with brief psychosis when under stress. This case serves as an example of an atypical presentation of ASD which can be mistaken for schizoaffective disorder. It is important to establish the correct diagnosis, as the subsequent treatment and management of the patient's problems will depend on it. In such a patient, a low dose of atypical antipsychotic medication with serotonergic properties and psychotherapy would be the treatment of choice.
35273718|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are a group of lifelong neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by cognitive deficits and impaired social and communicative development that have been rising in prevalence in recent decades. These disorders may be accompanied by disabling health issues and often lead to a substantial economic burden. The causes and mechanisms of ASD have not yet been fully elucidated, although it has been reported that genetic background, epigenetic modification, and environmental risk factors all contribute to the development of ASD. Environmental factors, which include prenatal circumstances or events, all play a very important role in the early development of autism, yet the exact mechanism remains largely undetermined. In this review, we promote a 'rethinking' of autism as a neurodevelopmental disease that originates from early life development. We focus on the impact of the prenatal and maternal risk factors such as maternal diabetes, prenatal chemical exposure, and hormone imbalances during pregnancy on the risk for ASD development in children and offspring, identifying important pathological bases and prevention measures for future decades. Further research focused on understanding the role of the environmental factors in the etiology of ASD will drive forward innovation strategies towards intervention and the prevention of the maternal risk factors for autism.
35273650|a|Looking to the mouth of a talker early in life predicts expressive communication. We hypothesized that looking at a talker's mouth may signal that infants are ready for increased supported joint engagement and that it subsequently facilitates prelinguistic vocal development and translates to broader gains in expressive communication. We tested this hypothesis in 50 infants aged 6-18 months with heightened and general population-level likelihood of autism diagnosis (Sibs-autism and Sibs-NA; respectively). We measured infants' gaze to a speaker's face using an eye tracking task, supported joint engagement during parent-child free play sessions, vocal complexity during a communication sample, and broader expressive communication. Looking at the mouth was indirectly associated with expressive communication via increased higher-order supported joint engagement and vocal complexity. This indirect effect did not vary according to sibling status. This study provides preliminary insights into the mechanisms by which looking at the mouth may influence expressive communication development.
35273487|a|An increasing number of resting-state functional magnetic resonance neuroimaging (R-fMRI) studies have used functional connections as discriminative features for machine learning to identify patients with brain diseases. However, it remains unclear which functional connections could serve as highly discriminative features to realize the classification of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The aim of this study was to find ASD-related functional connectivity patterns and examine whether these patterns had the potential to provide neuroimaging-based information to clinically assist with the diagnosis of ASD by means of machine learning. We investigated the whole-brain interregional functional connections derived from R-fMRI. Data were acquired from 48 boys with ASD and 50 typically developing age-matched controls at NYU Langone Medical Center from the publicly available Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange I (ABIDE I) dataset; the ASD-related functional connections identified by the Boruta algorithm were used as the features of support vector machine (SVM) to distinguish patients with ASD from typically developing controls (TDC); a permutation test was performed to assess the classification performance. Approximately, 92.9% of participants were correctly classified by a combined SVM and leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV) approach, wherein 95.8% of patients with ASD were correctly identified. The default mode network (DMN) exhibited a relatively high network degree and discriminative power. Eight important brain regions showed a high discriminative power, including the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC). Significant correlations were found between the classification scores of several functional connections and ASD symptoms (p < 0.05). This study highlights the important role of DMN in ASD identification. Interregional functional connections might provide useful information for the clinical diagnosis of ASD.
35273484|a|Although emerging evidence has implicated structural/functional abnormalities of patients with Autism Spectrum Disorder(ASD), definitive neuroimaging markers remain obscured due to inconsistent or incompatible findings, especially for structural imaging. Furthermore, brain differences defined by statistical analysis are difficult to implement individual prediction. The present study has employed the machine learning techniques under the unified framework in neuroimaging to identify the neuroimaging markers of patients with ASD and distinguish them from typically developing controls(TDC). To enhance the interpretability of the machine learning model, the study has processed three levels of assessments including model-level assessment, feature-level assessment, and biology-level assessment. According to these three levels assessment, the study has identified neuroimaging markers of ASD including the opercular part of bilateral inferior frontal gyrus, the orbital part of right inferior frontal gyrus, right rolandic operculum, right olfactory cortex, right gyrus rectus, right insula, left inferior parietal gyrus, bilateral supramarginal gyrus, bilateral angular gyrus, bilateral superior temporal gyrus, bilateral middle temporal gyrus, and left inferior temporal gyrus. In addition, negative correlations between the communication skill score in the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS_G) and regional gray matter (GM) volume in the gyrus rectus, left middle temporal gyrus, and inferior temporal gyrus have been detected. A significant negative correlation has been found between the communication skill score in ADOS_G and the orbital part of the left inferior frontal gyrus. A negative correlation between verbal skill score and right angular gyrus and a significant negative correlation between non-verbal communication skill and right angular gyrus have been found. These findings in the study have suggested the GM alteration of ASD and correlated with the clinical severity of ASD disease symptoms. The interpretable machine learning framework gives sight to the pathophysiological mechanism of ASD but can also be extended to other diseases.
35273483|a|Zinc is important in neural and synaptic development and neuronal transmission. Within the brain, zinc transporter 3 (ZnT3) is essential for zinc uptake into vesicles. Loss of vesicular zinc has been shown to produce neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD)-like behavior, such as decreased social interaction and increased anxiety- and repetitive-like behavior. Maternal immune activation (MIA) has been identified as an environmental factor for NDDs, such as autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) and schizophrenia (SZ), in offspring, which occurs during pregnancy when the mother's immune system reacts to the exposure to viruses or infectious diseases. In this study, we investigated the interaction effect of a genetic factor [ZnT3 knockout (KO) mice] and an environmental factor (MIA). We induced MIA in pregnant female (dams) mice during mid-gestation, using polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (polyI:C), which mimics a viral infection. Male and female ZnT3 KO and wild-type (WT) offspring were tested in five behavioral paradigms: Ultrasonic Vocalizations (USVs) at postnatal day 9 (P9), Open Field Test, Marble Burying Test, three-Chamber Social Test, and Pre-pulse Inhibition (PPI) in adulthood (P60-75). Our results indicate that loss of vesicular zinc does not result in enhanced ASD- and SZ-like phenotype compared to WT, nor does it show a more pronounced phenotype in male ZnT3 KO compared to female ZnT3 KO. Finally, MIA offspring demonstrated an ASD- and SZ-like phenotype only in specific behavioral tests: increased calls emitted in USVs and fewer marbles buried. Our results suggest that there is no interaction between the loss of vesicular zinc and MIA induction in the susceptibility to developing an ASD- and SZ-like phenotype.
35273083|a|The projection neurons of the striatum, the principal nucleus of the basal ganglia, belong to one of two major pathways: the striatopallidal (indirect) pathway or the striatonigral (direct) pathway. Striatonigral axons project long-distances and encounter ascending (thalamocortical) while coursing alongside descending (corticofugal) tracts as they extend through the internal capsule and cerebral peduncle. These observations suggest that striatal circuitry may help to guide their trajectories. To investigate the developmental contributions of striatonigral axons to internal capsule formation, we have made use of Sox8-EGFP (striatal direct pathway) and Fezf2-TdTomato (corticofugal pathway) BAC transgenic reporter mice in combination with immunohistochemical markers to trace these axonal pathways throughout development. We show that striatonigral axons pioneer the internal capsule and cerebral peduncle and are temporally and spatially well-positioned to provide guidance for corticofugal and thalamocortical axons. Using Isl1 conditional knockout (cKO) mice, which exhibit disrupted striatonigral axon outgrowth, we observe both corticofugal and thalamocortical axon defects with either ventral forebrain- or telencephalon-specific Isl1 inactivation, despite Isl1 not being expressed in either cortical or thalamic projection neurons. Striatonigral axon defects can thus disrupt internal capsule formation. Our genome-wide transcriptomic analysis in Isl1 cKOs reveals changes in gene expression relevant to cell adhesion, growth cone dynamics, and extracellular matrix composition, suggesting potential mechanisms by which the striatonigral pathway exerts this guidance role. Taken together, our data support a novel pioneering role for the striatal direct pathway in the correct assembly of the ascending and descending axon tracts within the internal capsule and cerebral peduncle.Significance Statement:The basal ganglia are a group of subcortical nuclei with established roles in the coordination of voluntary motor programs, aspects of cognition, and the selection of appropriate social behaviors. Hence, disruptions in basal ganglia connectivity have been implicated in the motor, cognitive, and social dysfunction characterizing common neurodevelopmental disorders such as attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism spectrum disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, and tic disorder. Here, we identified a novel role for the striatonigral (direct) pathway in pioneering the internal capsule and cerebral peduncle and guiding axons extending to and from the cortex. Our findings suggest that abnormal development of basal ganglia circuits can drive secondary internal capsule defects and thereby may contribute to the pathology of these disorders.
35273034|a|
35272296|a|INTRODUCTION: The prenatal/perinatal exposure to infections may trigger neurodevelopmental alterations that lead to neuropsychiatric disorders such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Previous evidence points to long-term behavioral consequences, such as autistic-like behaviors in rodents induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) pre- and postnatal (PN) exposure during critical neurodevelopmental periods. Additionally, sex influences the prevalence and symptoms of ASD. Despite this, the mechanisms underlying this influence are poorly understood. We aim to study sex influences in behavioral and neurotrophic/inflammatory alterations triggered by LPS neonatal exposure in juvenile mice at an approximate age of ASD diagnosis in humans. METHODS: Swiss male and female mice on PN days 5 and 7 received a single daily injection of 500 mug/kg LPS from Escherichia coli or sterile saline (control group). We conducted behavioral determinations of locomotor activity, repetitive behavior, anxiety-like behavior, social interaction, and working memory in animals on PN25 (equivalent to 3-5 years old of the human). To determine BDNF levels in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus, we used animals on PN8 (equivalent to a human term infant) and PN25. In addition, we evaluated iba-1 (microglia marker), TNFalpha, and parvalbumin expression on PN25. RESULTS: Male juvenile mice presented repetitive behavior, anxiety, and working memory deficits. Females showed social impairment and working memory deficits. In the neurochemical analysis, we detected lower BDNF levels in brain areas of female mice that were more evident in juvenile mice. Only LPS-challenged females presented a marked hippocampal expression of the microglial activation marker, iba-1, and increased TNFalpha levels, accompanied by a lower parvalbumin expression. DISCUSSION/CONCLUSION: Male and female mice presented distinct behavioral alterations. However, LPS-challenged juvenile females showed the most prominent neurobiological alterations related to autism, such as increased microglial activation and parvalbumin impairment. Since these sex-sensitive alterations seem to be age-dependent, a better understanding of changes induced by the exposure to specific risk factors throughout life represents essential targets for developing strategies for autism prevention and precision therapy.
35272052|a|Non-coding variants in the human genome significantly influence human traits and complex diseases via their regulation and modification effects. Hence, an increasing number of computational methods are developed to predict the effects of variants in human non-coding sequences. However, it is difficult for inexperienced users to select appropriate computational methods from dozens of available methods. To solve this issue, we assessed 12 performance metrics of 24 methods on four independent non-coding variant benchmark datasets: (1) rare germline variants from clinical relevant sequence variants (ClinVar), (2) rare somatic variants from catalogue of somatic mutations in cancer (COSMIC), (3) common regulatory variants from curated expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) data, and (4) disease-associated common variants from curated genome-wide association studies (GWAS). All 24 tested methods performed differently under various conditions, indicating varying strengths and weaknesses under different scenarios. Importantly, the performance of existing methods was acceptable for rare germline variants from ClinVar with the area under the curve (AUC) of 0.4481-0.8033 and poor for rare somatic variants from COSMIC (AUC: 0.4984-0.7131), common regulatory variants from curated eQTL data (AUC: 0.4837-0.6472), and disease-associated common variants from curated GWAS (AUC: 0.4766-0.5188). We also compared the prediction performance of 24 methods for non-coding de novo mutations in autism spectrum disorder and found that the combined annotation-dependent depletion (CADD) and context-dependent tolerance score (CDTS) methods showed better performance. Summarily, we assessed the performance of 24 computational methods under diverse scenarios, providing preliminary advice for proper tool selection, guiding the development of new techniques in interpreting non-coding variants.
35271727|a|CHAMP1-related neurodevelopmental disorder, or CHAMP1 disorder, is a recently described genetic syndrome associated with developmental delay, intellectual disability, behavioral symptoms, medical comorbidities, and dysmorphic features. To date, literature has focused on medical review and dysmorphology but has yet to prospectively assess neurobehavioral core domains such as autism, or behavioral, language, cognitive, and sensory features. Here, we present deep phenotyping results for 11 individuals with CHAMP1 disorder, based on approximately 12 hours of remote clinician-administered assessments and standardized caregiver questionnaires. Diagnoses of autism spectrum disorder were given to 33% of participants; repetitive behaviors and sensory-seeking symptoms were prominent in this cohort. In addition, 60% of participants met the criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). High rates of ADHD and relatively low rates of treatment suggest potential areas for intervention. This study represents the first prospective phenotyping analysis of individuals with CHAMP1 disorder. The utility of specific measures as clinical endpoints, as well as benefits and limitations of remote phenotyping, are described.
35271598|a|The Animated Triangles Task (AT) is commonly used to measure Theory of Mind (ToM). AT can be scored by clinicians based on participants' verbal responses (AT-verbal) or using a multiple-choice paradigm (AT-MCQ). This study aimed to evaluate the validity of the less time-consuming AT-MCQ. To do this, we examined agreement and correlations between the AT-MCQ and the original AT-verbal scores in 1546 adolescents from a population-based sample. As a supplementary analysis of known-groups validity, we examined if AT-MCQ was as sensitive as AT-verbal in detecting ToM-limitations in 54 adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), using register-data. The agreement between AT-verbal and AT-MCQ varied markedly across test items. Scores on the two scoring methods were weakly correlated. Both scoring methods weakly detected differences between adolescents with and without ASD in this population-based sample. Most participants had appropriate responses on both AT-MCQ and AT-verbal, which yielded overall acceptable agreement. However, the feasibility of using either scoring methods to measure ToM-limitations in adolescents from the general population is questionable.
35270764|a|This study aimed to assess some early symptoms of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) measured by a screening tool developed for an early detection of ASD. We investigated if the early symptoms were associated with toddlers' age, gender or ASD familial risk status. We used the Polish version of the Quantitative Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (Q-CHAT) to assess 1024 children aged 16 to 36 months. The sample included four groups of participants: typically developing toddlers, toddlers with parent-reported ASD-specific concerns, toddlers at risk for autism due to having an older sibling with ASD, and toddlers with a developmental delay. We found that mean Q-CHAT scores were significantly higher in boys than in girls. We did not find any associations between Q-CHAT scores and age. We observed that toddlers with a familial risk for ASD and those with a developmental delay scored significantly higher than controls. We collated these results with previous studies that used the Q-CHAT and other instruments.
35270709|a|Having an autistic child significantly impairs the functioning of the family, including the wellbeing of the parents. The aim of this study was to assess whether loneliness mediates the relationship between perceived stress and the severity of depressive symptoms in the studied sample of parents. This cross-sectional study involved 39 parents of autistic children and 45 parents of non-autistic children. They completed a set of tests: a survey on sociodemographic and clinical data and psychometric questionnaires, i.e., Beck Depression Inventory II (BDI), De Jong Gierveld Loneliness Scale (DJGLS), and Perceived Stress Questionnaire (KPS). A rise in external and intrapsychic stress, independently, was linked to a rise in the severity of depressive symptoms. The severity of depression, loneliness and stress was higher among parents of autistic children compared with parents of non-autistic children. Intrapsychic stress exhibited an indirect effect through loneliness on the worsening of depressive symptoms.
35270490|a|BACKGROUND: We investigated whether individuals with high levels of autistic traits integrate relevant communicative signals, such as facial expression, when decoding eye-gaze direction. METHODS: Students with high vs. low scores on the Autism Spectrum Quotient (AQ) performed a task in which they responded to the eye directions of faces, presented on the left or the right side of a screen, portraying different emotional expressions. RESULTS: In both groups, the identification of gaze direction was faster when the eyes were directed towards the center of the scene. However, in the low AQ group, this effect was larger for happy faces than for neutral faces or faces showing other emotional expressions, whereas participants from high AQ group were not affected by emotional expressions. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that individuals with more autistic traits may not integrate multiple communicative signals based on their emotional value.
35270253|a|We aimed to address a policy-relevant research area with high priority, namely disseminating early intervention for children on the autism spectrum into mainstream community settings. The study cohort comprised 47 children with a diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) receiving the Early Start Denver Model (ESDM) intervention: 23 children attending an Autism Specific Early Learning and Care Centre (ASELCC) and 24 children attending a mainstream preschool setting. Group comparisons revealed that the overall response to intervention was in the majority of cases not significantly different between settings. One difference was found in that children in the mainstream preschool setting showed a significant reduction in externalising behaviours compared to the children attending the autism-specific preschool. Intervention duration was found to influence outcomes with a one-month increase in duration found to improve expressive language skills. While the results need to be interpreted with caution due to the small sample size, these findings suggest that early intervention can be successfully delivered in both autism-specific and mainstream settings. However, those families needing additional parent support may be better served by a specialised service.
35270242|a|Rare-disease registries can be useful for studying the associations between environmental exposures and disease severity, but often require the addition of a healthy comparison control group. Defining a surrogate control group, matched and balanced on potentially confounding variables, would allow for the comparison of exposure distributions with cases from a registry. In the present study, we assess whether controls selected externally, using stratification score (SS) matching, can serve as effective proxies for internal controls. In addition, we use methyl paraben (MEPB) to compare the estimated associations between an externally matched sample and case-control frequencies in a cohort with internally matched controls. We started with 225 eligible cases of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) from Childhood Autism Risks from Genetics and the Environment (CHARGE), 241 internal controls from CHARGE, and 265 external controls from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) cycles 2005-2016. We calculated the SSs using demographic covariates and matched 1:1 using a caliper method without a replacement. The distribution of the covariates and the mean squared error of the paired differences (MSEpaired) in the SSs between the internal and external group were similar (MSEpaired = 0.007 and 0.011, respectively). The association between MEPB and ASD compared to the controls was similar between the externally matched SS pairs and the original frequency matched cohort. Controls selected externally, via SS matching, can provide a comparable bias reduction to that provided by the internal controls, and therefore may be a useful strategy in situations when the internal controls are not available.
35269516|a|KCNQ2 mutations can cause benign familial neonatal convulsions (BFNCs), epileptic encephalopathy (EE), and mild-to-profound neurodevelopmental disabilities. Mutations in the KCNQ2 selectivity filter (SF) are critical to neurodevelopmental outcomes. Three patients with neonatal EE carry de novo heterozygous KCNQ2 p.Thr287Ile, p.Gly281Glu and p.Pro285Thr, and all are followed-up in our clinics. Whole-cell patch-clamp analysis with transfected mutations was performed. The Kv7.2 in three mutations demonstrated significant current changes in the homomeric-transfected cells. The conduction curves for V1/2, the K slope, and currents in 3 mutations were lower than those for the wild type (WT). The p.Gly281Glu had a worse conductance than the p.Thr287Ile and p.Pro285Thr, the patient compatible with p.Gly281Glu had a worse clinical outcome than patients with p.Thr287Ile and p.Pro285Thr. The p.Gly281Glu had more amino acid weight changes than the p.Gly281Glu and p.Pro285Thr. Among 5 BFNCs and 23 EE from mutations in the SF, the greater weight of the mutated protein compared with that of the WT was presumed to cause an obstacle to pore size, which is one of the most important factors in the phenotype and outcome. For the 35 mutations in the SF domain, using changes in amino acid weight between the WT and the KCNQ2 mutations to predict EE resulted in 80.0% sensitivity and 80% specificity, a positive prediction rate of 96.0%, and a negative prediction rate of 40.0% (p = 0.006, chi2 (1, n = 35) = 7.56; odds ratio 16.0, 95% confidence interval, 1.50 to 170.63). The findings suggest that p.Thr287Ile, p.Gly281Glu and p.Pro285Thr are pathogenic to KCNQ2 EE. In mutations in SF, a mutated protein heavier than the WT is a factor in the Kv7.2 current and outcome.
35268524|a|Although various studies have investigated symptoms of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS), little is known about the consequences of these symptoms, especially in psychosocial function. We aimed to explore ASD symptoms in adults with PWS with special attention to psychosocial functionality. This cross-sectional study included 26 adults (15 women) with PWS who attended a reference unit for rare diseases. Participants' primary caregivers completed the Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS), and clinicians assessed multidimensional functioning with the Personal and Social Performance Scale (PSP). Impaired social responsiveness was identified in 20 (76.9%) participants, and manifest to marked difficulties in social functioning were identified in 13 (50%). Participants with impaired social responsiveness (SRS >= 60) had significantly worse scores in functionality measured with the PSP (U = 12.5; p = 0.009) and with three of the four PSP main areas. Moreover, scores for the Social Cognition domain of the SRS correlated positively with the Socially useful activities (p < 0.05) and Personal and social relationships (p < 0.01) main areas of the PSP. These results suggest that difficulties in social skills should be assessed in all psychosocial evaluations of patients with PWS.
35268354|a|Parenting a child with autism can be particularly stressful and challenging, especially during periods of crises. This study focuses on parenting children with autism during the COVID-19 pandemic in comparison to the economic crisis, six years ago. We administered the same set of questionnaires (CES-D, F-COPES, PSI-SF, and WHOQoL-BREF), along with a demographic characteristic and a COVID-19-related questionnaire to the same group of parents of children with autism as we did six years ago. Results indicated that during the COVID-19 crisis, the level of parenting stress and the distress due to personal factors related to demands of parenting, were significantly lower compared to the economic crisis, while the environment facet of quality of life was significantly higher. The depressive symptomatology was elevated during both periods. Finally, when addressing the pandemic crisis, parents were more likely to passively accept problematic issues, less able to obtain social support, and less able to acquire and accept help from others. In our sample, findings differentiate the genre of crises through the parents' responses regarding the sense of competence in their parental role, their quality of life, and the coping strategies they implemented. The study implies that each crisis must be confronted with particular responses to particular needs.
35268284|a|COVID-19 has impacted negatively on the mental health of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), as well as on their parents. Remote health services are a sustainable approach to behavior management interventions and to giving caregivers emotional support in several clinical domains. During the COVID-19 pandemic, we investigated the feasibility of a web-based behavioral skills training (BST) program for 16 parents and their children with ASD at home. The BST parent training package was tailored to each different specific behavioral disorder that characterizes children with ASD. After training, we found a significant reduction in the frequency of all the targeted behavioral disorders, as well as an improvement in psychological distress and the perception of the severity of ASD-related symptoms in parents. Our data confirm the efficacy of remote health care systems in the management of behavioral disorders of children with ASD, as well as of their parents during the COVID-19 pandemic.
35267147|a|Social impairments characteristic of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are evident in early childhood and often worsen. There is a paucity of evidence-based interventions explicitly targeting social skill development for young children with ASD and few actively integrate caregivers. The PEERS  program, an evidence-based caregiver-assisted social skills program, was extended for young children with ASD (i.e., PEERS  for Preschoolers (P4P)). This pilot study expands upon initial results by examining the feasibility of a briefer intervention period and the effectiveness in improving child social skills among 15 children with ASD. Results suggest P4P recruitment, participant retention, and implementation are feasible across clinicians and sites. Further, P4P appears to improve social skills, maintained post-intervention. Future research might examine mechanisms that lead to results.
35266994|a|Audio-visual (AV) integration plays a crucial role in supporting social functions and communication in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, behavioral findings remain mixed and, importantly, little is known about the underlying neurophysiological bases. Studies in neurotypical adults indicate that oscillatory brain activity in different frequencies subserves AV integration, pointing to a central role of (i) individual alpha frequency (IAF), which would determine the width of the cross-modal binding window; (ii) pre-/peri-stimulus theta oscillations, which would reflect the expectation of AV co-occurrence; (iii) post-stimulus oscillatory phase reset, which would temporally align the different unisensory signals. Here, we investigate the neural correlates of AV integration in children with ASD and typically developing (TD) peers, measuring electroencephalography during resting state and in an AV integration paradigm. As for neurotypical adults, AV integration dynamics in TD children could be predicted by the IAF measured at rest and by a modulation of anticipatory theta oscillations at single-trial level. Conversely, in ASD participants, AV integration/segregation was driven exclusively by the neural processing of the auditory stimulus and the consequent auditory-induced phase reset in visual regions, suggesting that a disproportionate elaboration of the auditory input could be the main factor characterizing atypical AV integration in autism.
35266078|a|Aim of the present study was to evaluate the relationship between sensory sensitivity and autistic eating behaviours or Eating Disorders (EDs) symptomatology, in a group of 75 adults with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) without intellectual disabilities, through a series of self-report questionnaires. We found that, controlling for demographic and clinical features: (i) hypersensitivity in the vision domain predicted higher levels of both EDs symptoms and autistic eating behaviours; (ii) hyposensitivity in the taste domain predicted higher levels of EDs symptoms. This gives preliminary evidence that not only in children diagnosed with ASDs, but even in adult individuals, the threshold of sensory sensitivity is associated with dysfunctional eating behaviours.
35266053|a|Autism spectrum disorder is a pervasive neurodevelopmental disorder with a substantial contribution to the global disease burden. Despite intensive research efforts, the aetiopathogenesis remains unclear. The Janus-faced antioxidant enzymes superoxide dismutase 1-3 have been implicated in initiating oxidative stress and as such may constitute a potential therapeutic target. However, no measurement has been taken in human autistic brain samples. The aim of this study is to measure superoxide dismutase 1-3 in autistic cerebral organoids as an in vitro model of human foetal neurodevelopment. Whole brain organoids were created from induced pluripotent stem cells from healthy individuals (n = 5) and individuals suffering from autism (n = 4). Using Pierce bicinchoninic acid and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays, the protein and superoxide dismutase 1, 2, and 3 concentrations were quantified in the cerebral organoids at days 22, 32, and 42. Measurements were normalized to the protein concentration. Results represented using medians and interquartile ranges. Using Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test, an abrupt rise in the superoxide dismutase concentration was observed at day 32 and onwards. Using Wilcoxon rank-sum test, no differences were observed between healthy (SOD1: 35.56 ng/mL +- 3.46; SOD2: 2435.80 ng/mL +- 1327.00; SOD3: 1854.88 ng/mL +- 867.94) and autistic (SOD1: 32.85 ng/mL +- 5.26; SOD2: 2717.80 ng/mL +- 1889.10; SOD3: 1690.18 ng/mL +- 615.49) organoids. Cerebral organoids recapitulate many aspects of human neurodevelopment, but the diffusion restriction may render efforts in modelling differences in oxidative stress futile due to the intrinsic hypoxia and central necrosis.
35265999|a|BACKGROUND AND HYPOTHESIS: Although large-scale neuroimaging studies have demonstrated similar patterns of structural brain abnormalities across major psychiatric disorders, the underlying genetic etiology behind these similar cross-disorder patterns is not well understood. STUDY DESIGN: We quantified the extent of shared genetic components between cortical structures and major psychiatric disorders (CS-MPD) by using genome-wide association study (GWAS) summary statistics of 70 cortical structures (surface area and thickness of the whole cortex and 34 cortical regions) and five major psychiatric disorders, consisting of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), bipolar disorder (BD), major depressive disorder (MDD), and schizophrenia (SCZ). Cross-disorder analyses were then conducted to estimate the degree of similarity in CS-MPD shared genetic components among these disorders. STUDY RESULTS: The CS-MPD shared genetic components have medium-to-strong positive correlations in ADHD, BD, MDD, and SCZ (r = 0.415 to r = 0.806) while ASD was significantly correlated with ADHD, BD, and SCZ (r = 0.388 to r = 0.403). These pairwise correlations of CS-MPD shared genetic components among disorders were significantly associated with corresponding cross-disorder similarities in cortical structural abnormalities (r = 0.668), accounting for 44% variance. In addition, one latent shared factor consisted primarily of BD, MDD, and SCZ, explaining 62.47% of the total variance in CS-MPD shared genetic components of all disorders. CONCLUSIONS: The current results bridge the gap between shared cross-disorder heritability and shared structural brain abnormalities in major psychiatric disorders, providing important implications for a shared genetic basis of cortical structures in these disorders.
35265288|a|Background: It is difficult to perform dental procedures in autistic children, and parental involvement is necessary for successful hospital dental services. Therefore, in order to promote oral health in autistic children, this study was aimed to explore the knowledge, attitude, and performance of autistic children's parents with respect to hospital dentistry. Materials and Methods: This cross-sectional study was conducted with the parents of 100 autistic children aged 2-6 years selected from among the children of Isfahan autism treatment centers. A self-administered questionnaire, including parental demographic information and 22 items on the assessment of knowledge, attitude, and performance of autistic children's parents regarding hospital dental procedures under general anesthesia, was completed by 100 parents. P <0.05 was considered statistically significant. Data were analyzed by SPSS software using Chi-square test. Results: A total of 100 parents of autistic children, with an average age of 37.4 +- 6.1 years, were recruited in this study. The results showed that 56%, 50%, and 3% of parents had poor knowledge about dental hospital services, dental complications, and hospital dentistry rules, respectively. Further, 51% of parents believed that general anesthesia was dangerous to their children. In addition, 69% of children had little or no cooperation with the dentist. There was also a significant relationship between the knowledge, attitude, and performance of autistic children's parents regarding hospital dentistry and the parents' age and sex. Conclusion: This study showed that autistic children's parents had poor knowledge, attitude, and performance with respect to hospital dentistry.
35265118|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a type of mental illness that can be detected by using social media data and biomedical images. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurological disease correlated with brain growth that later impacts the physical impression of the face. Children with ASD have dissimilar facial landmarks, which set them noticeably apart from typically developed (TD) children. Novelty of the proposed research is to design a system that is based on autism spectrum disorder detection on social media and face recognition. To identify such landmarks, deep learning techniques may be used, but they require a precise technology for extracting and producing the proper patterns of the face features. This study assists communities and psychiatrists in experimentally detecting autism based on facial features, by using an uncomplicated web application based on a deep learning system, that is, a convolutional neural network with transfer learning and the flask framework. Xception, Visual Geometry Group Network (VGG19), and NASNETMobile are the pretrained models that were used for the classification task. The dataset that was used to test these models was collected from the Kaggle platform and consisted of 2,940 face images. Standard evaluation metrics such as accuracy, specificity, and sensitivity were used to evaluate the results of the three deep learning models. The Xception model achieved the highest accuracy result of 91%, followed by VGG19 (80%) and NASNETMobile (78%).
35263756|a|INTRODUCTION: Children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) appear to be at greater risk of excess weight gain. The aim of this systematic review and meta-analysis was to examine whether children with ASD have a greater prevalence of obesity and whether the prevalence of ASD is higher in children with obesity. METHODS: We conducted a systematic search on PubMed, Scopus and PsychINFO until May 21, 2021. We used the meta package in the R in order to calculate the pooled prevalence and relative risk of obesity in children with ASD. RESULTS: We found 20 eligible studies investigating the prevalence of obesity in children with ASD, with the prevalence ranging from 7.9 to 31.8% and from 1.4 to 23.6% among controls. All but three studies originated from the US. The proportion of children with obesity in ASD populations was 17% (95 % CI: 13-22). The relative risk of obesity in children with ASD compared with control children was 1.58 (95% CI: 1.34-1.86). There were no controlled studies reporting on the prevalence of ASD in children with obesity. CONCLUSION: Children and adolescents with ASD have a higher prevalence of obesity than healthy controls. There is a need for further prevalence studies of obesity in children with ASD, especially outside the United States, since the few European studies carried out have failed to show a significant difference between obesity prevalence in children with and without ASD. There is no knowledge at all regarding the prevalence of ASD among children with obesity.
35263744|a|etal growth restriction (FGR) is associated with long-term neurodevelopmental disabilities including learning and behavioural disorders, autism, and cerebral palsy. Persistent changes in brain structure and function that are associated with developmental disabilities are demonstrated in FGR neonates. However, the mechanisms underlying these changes remain to be determined. There are currently no therapeutic interventions available to protect the FGR newborn brain. With the wide range of long-term neurodevelopmental disorders associated with FGR, the use of an animal model appropriate to investigating mechanisms of injury in the FGR newborn is crucial for the development of effective and targeted therapies for babies. Piglets are ideal animals to explore how perinatal insults affect brain structure and function. FGR occurs spontaneously in the piglet, unlike other animal models that require surgical or chemical intervention, allowing brain outcomes to be studied without the confounding impacts of experimental interventions. The FGR piglet mimics many of the human pathophysiological outcomes associated with FGR including asymmetrical growth restriction with brain sparing. This review will discuss the similarities observed in brain outcomes between the human FGR and FGR piglet from a magnetic resonance imaging in the living and a histological perspective. FGR piglet studies provide the opportunity to determine and track mechanisms of brain injury in a clinically relevant animal model of FGR. Findings from these FGR piglet studies may provide critical information to rapidly translate neuroprotective interventions to clinic to improve outcomes for newborn babies.
35263701|a|Alpha-synuclein overexpression and aggregation are critical factors in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD). Clinical cases with alpha-synuclein (SNCA) multiplications or deletions indicate that gene expression levels are essential for neurodegeneration and neurodevelopment. Here, we developed an isogenic SNCA gene dosage model using CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing to introduce frameshift mutations into exon 2 of the SNCA coding region in human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from a patient with an SNCA triplication. We derived and characterized clones with different frameshift mutations. This isogenic SNCA gene dosage panel will address the physiological and detrimental effects of varying alpha-synuclein expression levels.
35263625|a|One mechanism by which genetic factors influence complex traits and diseases is altering gene expression. Direct measurement of gene expression in relevant tissues is rarely tenable; however, genetically regulated gene expression (GReX) can be estimated using prediction models derived from large multi-omic datasets. These approaches have led to the discovery of many gene-trait associations, but whether models derived from predominantly European ancestry (EA) reference panels can map novel associations in ancestrally diverse populations remains unclear. We applied PrediXcan to impute GReX in 51,520 ancestrally diverse Population Architecture using Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE) participants (35% African American, 45% Hispanic/Latino, 10% Asian, and 7% Hawaiian) across 25 key cardiometabolic traits and relevant tissues to identify 102 novel associations. We then compared associations in PAGE to those in a random subset of 50,000 White British participants from UK Biobank (UKBB50k) for height and body mass index (BMI). We identified 517 associations across 47 tissues in PAGE but not UKBB50k, demonstrating the importance of diverse samples in identifying trait-associated GReX. We observed that variants used in PrediXcan models were either more or less differentiated across continental-level populations than matched-control variants depending on the specific population reflecting sampling bias. Additionally, variants from identified genes specific to either PAGE or UKBB50k analyses were more ancestrally differentiated than those in genes detected in both analyses, underlining the value of population-specific discoveries. This suggests that while EA-derived transcriptome imputation models can identify new associations in non-EA populations, models derived from closely matched reference panels may yield further insights. Our findings call for more diversity in reference datasets of tissue-specific gene expression.
35263554|a|
35263553|a|PURPOSE: The purpose of this letter is to draw attention to recent literature regarding the communication abilities and experiences of Autistic people and the potential for detrimental effects on mental health and service provision resulting from behavior modification programs. I will argue that viewing Autistic communication as characterized by pragmatic language impairment is inconsistent with evidence of effective and positive communication between Autistic people and with the social model of disability. CONCLUSION: Proposals for interventions targeting Autistic people should carefully weigh the costs and benefits for Autistic people and should integrate the perspectives of Autistic people.
35263459|a|AIMS: To investigate bruxism in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and neurotypical individuals. METHODS AND RESULTS: Searches were conducted in the MedLine via Ovid, Embase via Ovid, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Scopus, Web of Science, Latin American and Caribbean Health Sciences (LILACS), Brazilian Library of Dentistry (BBO) and SciELO databases, grey literature and a hand search up to December 2020 with no restrictions imposed regarding language or year of publication (CRD42020211307). For the meta-analysis, the frequency of bruxism was extracted, with the calculation of odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) using a random effects model in RevManager. The certainty of the evidence was assessed using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE). Seventeen case-control studies were included in the qualitative synthesis and 15 were included in the meta-analysis, totaling a population of 3850 individuals. The ASD group was more likely to develop bruxism than the controls (OR: 3.80; 95% CI: 2.06-7.01). The certainty of the evidence was classified as "very low" for the occurrence of bruxism between ASD and control individuals. CONCLUSION: It is uncertain whether individuals with ASD are more likely to have bruxism than healthy controls.
35262827|a|Transitioning autistic youth from pediatric to adult healthcare requires coordination of multiple stakeholders, including youth, caregivers, and pediatric and adult care providers, whose interests at times overlap but often differ. To understand barriers and facilitators to inclusive transition experiences, we conducted thematic analysis of interviews with 39 stakeholders from the same large, integrated healthcare system. We identified three major themes: (1) Navigating the healthcare transition without guidance, (2) Health consequences of a passive healthcare transition, and (3) Strategies for inclusion and continuous engagement. Facilitators included gradual transition planning, a warm handoff between providers, and support of shared healthcare decision-making. Providers also sought clinical tools and logistical supports such as care coordinators and longer transition-specific visit types to enhance patient-centered care.
35261293|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Professional guidance and support in response to first concerns appears to be an important predictor of the level of satisfaction with the detection process of autism in young children. In this study, we analyzed the views of 1342 family members, including 1278 parents, who completed an online survey form collecting information about their experience and satisfaction with the early detection of autism in their child. Specifically, we were interested in how specific experiences with the detection process relate to the satisfaction with it and whether we could identify important predictors of satisfaction. The detection process is an emotionally charged period for parents, often described as painful, chaotic, and lengthy. A better understanding of their experiences is important to take appropriate action to improve the detection process. In our sample, the level of satisfaction with the detection process varied greatly from one respondent to another. Among the different experiences we considered, whether or not respondents received professional guidance and support in response to first concerns explained most of this variation. We also found that difficulty finding information about detection services, lack of professional guidance and support in response to first concerns, having to find a diagnostic service on one's own, and longer delays between confirmation of concerns and first appointment with a specialist were experiences associated with a greater likelihood of being unsatisfied. The findings of this study highlight the importance of the parent-professional relationship in the detection process and have important practical implications for health administrations to improve the detection process.
35261274|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Early intervention for individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is dependent on reliable methods for early detection. Screening for ASD symptoms is an important strategy in low- and middle-income countries that often lack adequate service infrastructure. This study aims to conduct preliminary evaluation of the psychometric properties of a tool developed and deployed in Nigeria called the Nigerian Autism Screening Questionnaire (NASQ). Results demonstrated that NASQ, when used as a community-based survey, has a clear factor structure with consistent measurement across age and sex, and that scores from below average to well above average are measured reliably. Future research is needed to examine the performance of this tool against confirmatory ASD diagnosis in screening and diagnostic contexts to further understand the utility and applicability of this tool in the resource-limited Nigerian setting.
35261207|a|The neurobiology of autism has been shown to involve alterations in cortical morphology and gamma-aminobutyric acid A (GABAA ) receptor density. We hypothesized that GABAA receptor binding potential (GABAA R BPND ) would correlate with cortical thickness, but their correlations would differ between autistic adults and typically developing (TD) controls. We studied 50 adults (23 autism, 27 TD, mean age of 27 years) using magnetic resonance imaging to measure cortical thickness, and [18 F]flumazenil positron emission tomography imaging to measure GABAA R BPND . We determined the correlations between cortical thickness and GABAA R BPND by cortical lobe, region-of-interest, and diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We also explored potential sex differences in the relationship between cortical thickness and autism characteristics, as measured by autism spectrum quotient (AQ) scores. Comparing autism and TD groups, no significant differences were found in cortical thickness or GABAA R BPND . In both autism and TD groups, a negative relationship between cortical thickness and GABAA R BPND was observed in the frontal and occipital cortices, but no relationship was found in the temporal or limbic cortices. A positive correlation was seen in the parietal cortex that was only significant for the autism group. Interestingly, in an exploratory analysis, we found sex differences in the relationships between cortical thickness and GABAA R BPND , and cortical thickness and AQ scores in the left postcentral gyrus. LAY SUMMARY: The thickness of the brain cortex and the density of the receptors associated with inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA have been hypothesized to underlie the neurobiology of autism. In this study, we found that these biomarkers correlate positively in the parietal cortex, but negatively in the frontal and occipital cortical regions of the brain. Furthermore, we collected preliminary evidence that the correlations between cortical thickness and GABA receptor density are sexdependent in a brain region where sensory inputs are registered.
35261202|a|Prior work has suggested associations between prenatal exposure to several classes of pesticides and child autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We examined a previously developed pesticide residue burden score (PRBS) and intake of high pesticide residue foods in association with ASD-related traits. Participants were drawn from the Early Autism Risk Longitudinal Investigation (EARLI) (n = 256), a cohort following mothers who previously had a child with ASD through a subsequent pregnancy and that child's development. ASD-related traits were captured according to total Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS) scores at age 3 (mean raw total SRS score = 35.8). Dietary intake was assessed through a food frequency questionnaire collected during pregnancy. We also incorporated organic intake and fatty foods in modified versions of the PRBS. Associations between high-residue fruit and vegetable intake, the overall PRBS and modified versions of it, and SRS scores were assessed using multivariable linear regression. Overall, we did not observe associations between pesticide residues in foods and ASD-related outcomes, and modified versions of the PRBS yielded similar findings. However, reductions in ASD-related traits were observed with higher overall fruit and vegetable intake (adjusted estimates for Q4 vs. Q1: beta -12.76, 95%CI -27.8, 2.3). Thus, findings from this high familial probability cohort did not suggest relationships between pesticide residues in the diet according to the PRBS and ASD-related traits. Beneficial effects of fruit and vegetable intake may influence these relationships. Future work should consider fruit and vegetable intake in association with ASD-related outcomes. LAY SUMMARY: Diet is the main source of exposure to most pesticides in use today. In this study, we examined the relationship between pesticide exposure from residues in the diet during pregnancy and child autism-related traits. We found that these pesticide residues from the diet were not related to child autism-related outcomes at age three. However, higher prenatal fruit and vegetable intake was associated with reductions in child autism-related traits.
35260884|a|There is an insufficient number of specialty developmental-behavioral pediatrics (DBP) physicians, despite nearly 25% of children and adolescents having a developmental, learning, behavioral, or emotional problem. In the nearly 20 years since becoming a board-certified subspecialty, the definition of DBP clinical practice remains somewhat unclear. This lack of clarity likely contributes to recruitment challenges and workforce issues, and limited visibility of DBP among parents, other professionals, payors, and administrators. Defining DBP is therefore an important step in the survival and growth of the field. In this paper, we describe the methodology used to develop this definition along with the origins of DBP, the persistent challenges to defining its scope, what training in DBP involves, and what distinguishes DBP from other overlapping fields of medicine. We propose the following definition of DBP: developmental-behavioral pediatrics (DBP) is a board-certified, medical subspecialty that cares for children with complex and severe DBP problems by recognizing the multifaceted influences on the development and behavior of children and addressing them through systems-based practice and a neurodevelopmental, strength-based approach that optimizes functioning. Developmental behavioral pediatricians care for children from birth through young adulthood along a continuum including those suspected of, at risk for, or known to have developmental and behavioral disorders.
35260744|a|Psychological studies have generally shown that individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) have particularity in the processing of social information by using static or abstract images. Yet, a recent study showed that there was no difference in their use of social or non-social cues in dynamic interactive situations. To establish the cause of the inconsistent results, we added gaze cues in different directions to the chase detection paradigm to explore whether they would affect the performance of participants with ASD. Meanwhile, eye-tracking methodology was used to investigate whether the processing patterns of gaze cues were different between individuals with ASD and TD. In this study, unlike typical controls, participants with ASD showed no detection advantage when the direction of gaze was consistent with the direction of movement (oriented condition). The results suggested that individuals with ASD may utilize an atypical processing pattern, which makes it difficult for them to use social information contained in oriented gaze cues in dynamic interactive situations.
35260013|a|Dietary interventions are common but controversial treatments for autistic people. This study aims to understand the adoption of dietary interventions based on diffusion of innovations theory in the autism online community from four aspects: popularity, adoption process, the influence of opinion leaders, and post-adoption feedback. Our data was extracted from a Chinese autism community named Baidu Tieba autism forum. We applied a mixed-method including four analytical approaches: descriptive statistics for popularity analysis; machine learning models for automatic data classification and topic detection; social network analysis for exploring the influence of opinion leaders on the adoption phase; content analysis for revealing the family caregiver-reported feedback after adoption. Dietary interventions have become increasingly popular in the autism online community since 2018. Analysis of the adoption process revealed that family caregivers at different stages of adoption focused on different topics, and the number of interactions with opinion leaders had a significant effect on the highest level (p < .001) and stage span (p < .001) of health information adoption. According to findings from the feedback of family caregivers, the effects of dietary interventions varied from individuals with autism. Our study revealed the diffusion of unproven interventions, which is of great significance in promoting evidence-based practices.
35259819|a|Cell-based models are a promising tool in deciphering the molecular mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of neurological disorders as well as aiding in the discovery and development of future drug therapies. The greatest challenge is creating cell-based models that encapsulate the vast phenotypic presentations as well as the underlying genotypic etiology of these conditions. In this article, we discuss the recent advancements in cell-based models for understanding the pathophysiology of neurological disorders. We reviewed studies discussing the progression of cell-based models to the advancement of three-dimensional models and organoids that provide a more accurate model of the pathophysiology of neurological disorders in vivo. The better we understand how to create more precise models of the neurological system, the sooner we will be able to create patient-specific models and large libraries of these neurological disorders. While three-dimensional models can be used to discover the linking factors to connect the varying phenotypes, such models will also help to understand the early pathophysiology of these neurological disorders and how they are affected by their environment. The three-dimensional cell models will allow us to create more specific treatments and uncover potentially preventative measures in neurological disorders such as autism spectrum disorder, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
20301487|a|CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS) is characterized by distinctive physical features (particularly facial features that progress with age), developmental delay, cognitive impairment, and behavioral abnormalities. Infants have feeding difficulties, failure to thrive, hypotonia, hyporeflexia, prolonged napping or need to be awakened for feeds, and generalized lethargy. The majority of individuals function in the mild-to-moderate range of intellectual disability. The behavioral phenotype, including significant sleep disturbance, stereotypies, and maladaptive and self-injurious behaviors, is generally not recognized until age 18 months or older and continues to change until adulthood. Sensory integration issues are frequently noted. Children and adults typically have inattention, distractibility, hyperactivity, impulsivity, maladaptive behaviors including frequent outbursts/temper tantrums, attention seeking, disobedience, aggression, toileting difficulties, and self-injurious behaviors (SIB) including self-hitting, self-biting, and/or skin picking, inserting foreign objects into body orifices (polyembolokoilamania), and yanking fingernails and/or toenails (onychotillomania). Among the stereotypic behaviors described, the spasmodic upper-body squeeze or "self-hug" seems to be highly associated with SMS. The finger lick and page flipping ("lick and flip") behavior may be less prevalent than initially reported. An underlying developmental asynchrony, specifically between intellectual functioning and emotional maturity, may also contribute to maladaptive behaviors in people with SMS. DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SMS is based on clinical findings and confirmed by either detection of an interstitial deletion of 17p11.2 or by molecular genetic testing of RAI1. A visible interstitial deletion of chromosome 17p11.2 can be detected in all individuals with the common deletion by a routine G-banded analysis, provided the resolution is adequate (>=550 band). It is not uncommon for the deletion to be overlooked particularly when the indication for the cytogenetic study is not SMS. Molecular cytogenetic analysis by FISH using a DNA probe specific for the SMS critical region or aCGH is required in cases of submicroscopic deletions and/or to resolve equivocal cases. Mutation or deletion of RAI1 accounts for the majority of features in SMS. MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Early childhood intervention programs; special education; vocational training/supports later in life; and speech/language, physical, occupational, behavioral, and sensory integration therapies. Affected individuals may also benefit from use of psychotropic medication to increase attention and/or decrease hyperactivity, and therapeutic management of sleep disorders. Respite care and psychosocial support for family members are recommended. Surveillance: Annual multidisciplinary evaluations to assist in development of an individualized education program (IEP), evaluation of thyroid function, fasting lipid profile, routine urinalysis to evaluate for occult urinary tract infection, monitoring for scoliosis, ophthalmologic examination, periodic neurodevelopmental assessments and/or developmental/behavioral pediatric consultations, otolaryngologic follow up for assessment and management of otitis media and other sinus abnormalities, and audiologic evaluation to monitor for conductive or sensorineural hearing loss annually or as clinically indicated. GENETIC COUNSELING: Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS) is caused by deletion or mutation of RAI1 on chromosome 17p11.2. Virtually all occurrences are de novo. Complex familial chromosome rearrangements leading to del(17)(p11.2) and SMS occur but are rare. If parental chromosome analysis is normal, the risk to sibs of the proband is likely to be less than 1%. The small recurrence risk takes into account the possibility of germline mosaicism, which has been documented in at least two families. If a parent of the proband has a balanced chromosome rearrangement, at-risk family members can be tested by chromosome analysis and FISH. In the rare instance of a complex familial chromosome rearrangement, prenatal testing is possible for pregnancies at increased risk using a combination of routine cytogenetic studies and FISH.
35259742|a|BACKGROUND: Early Life Stress (ELS) describes a broad spectrum of adverse and stressful prenatal events, namely prenatal maternal stress (PMS), or early postnatal events, which can have detrimental long-term influences on the physiology, cognition, and behavior of an individual. There is abundant evidence indicating that ELS exerts its lasting effects on the physical and mental health of the individual, likely acting through a number of mediating mechanisms, including the disruption of developmental programming of the fetus. Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), for example, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), are a group of conditions that typically manifest during infancy, childhood, or adolescence and are characterized by developmental deficits in various domains. SUMMARY: The scope of the current mini-review is to provide an up-to-date summary of the findings regarding the association of ELS and NDDs and the possible hormonal mechanisms through which PMS exerts its impact on neurodevelopment. We focus on the available evidence regarding children and adolescents diagnosed with ADHD or ASD. ELS exposure during developmental vulnerability windows may increase the risk for either subclinical neuropsychological alterations or clinical conditions, such as NDDs. In fact, a large body of evidence underlies the association of ELS exposure and increased risk for NDDs in the offspring. KEY MESSAGES: The majority of data suggest that ELS, including PMS, may be associated with ADHD and ASD in the offspring, although there is no consensus regarding the critical developmental periods. Carefully controlled prospective studies are needed to determine the possible causal processes and mechanisms underlying the association of ELS and NDDs.
35259653|a|BACKGROUND: Previous studies have suggested an association between higher levels of parental autistic traits and negative aspects of parenting; however, the domain of autistic traits specifically associated with parenting difficulties has not been investigated yet. Moreover, it remains to be determined whether this association exists even after controlling for children's characteristics. AIMS: This study examined the relationship between each domain of parental autistic traits and parenting difficulties after controlling for children's characteristics in a Japanese community sample. METHODS AND PROCEDURES: Surveys were administered to 1373 Japanese adults who were parents to children in kindergartens, nursery schools, and elementary schools. OUTCOMES AND RESULTS: The results showed that parents with higher levels of autistic traits had more parenting difficulties. Even after controlling for children's sex, age, and emotional/behavioral problems, paternal impaired communication and maternal poor attention switching, impaired communication, and lack of imagination were related to higher parenting difficulties, while a higher maternal level of attention to detail was associated with lower difficulties in parenting. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: The findings of this study highlight the importance of focusing on parental autistic traits and providing appropriate parenting support considering these traits.
35259569|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopment disorder, marked by deficits in social communication and social interaction as well as by a restricted, repetitive patterns of behaviors, interests and activities. There is an increasing interest in the use of dance as part of rehabilitation for individuals with ASD. However, it is not clear how dance can influence on ASD symptoms. And few studies have measured and compared the outcomes of multiple studies. This study was aimed to provide a more comprehensive perspective of the efficacy of dance practice on ASD symptoms by conducting a systematic review with meta-analysis. METHODS: The electronic databases PubMed, EBSCO, MEDLINE, Cochrane and PsycINFO were searched for relevant studies reporting on the effects of dance on ASD symptoms. Only randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and non-randomized controlled studies were included in this review. Two review authors independently performed literature search, data extraction, and study quality assessment. Effect sizes for ASD symptoms were expressed as standardized mean differences (SMD) with 95% confidence intervals. RESULTS: Seven eligible studies were included for meta-analysis. Dance interventions varied in frequency (1-2 sessions/week), time (40 - 90 min), duration (7 - 17 weeks) and type. As compared to control groups, dance practice showed significant alleviation of overall symptoms of ASD (-1.48 points, CI -2.55 to - 0.42 points, p = 0.006, I2 = 75%) and improvement in social interaction (0.88, CI 0.46 to 1.30, p < 0.0001, I2 = 0%), but no significant effect on empathy (0.09, CI - 0.25 to 0.42, p = 0.61, I2 = 2%). CONCLUSIONS: Dance probably alleviate the negative symptoms and social deficits of individuals with ASD. However, little difference is found in empathy. Further research and studies are needed to determine the optimal dose and if dance results in greater benefits than other types of physical activity.
35259423|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disease characterized by impaired communication, impaired reciprocal social interaction, restricted sociability deficits, and the presence of stereotyped patterns of behaviors. Immune dysregulation has been suggested to play a possible etiological role in ASD. Recent studies have demonstrated that exposure to methylmercury chloride (MeHgCl) leads to abnormal gait, motor deficits, impaired hearing, and memory deficits; however, its effects on behavioral and immunological responses have not been adequately investigated in ASD. In this study, we investigated the effects of MeHgCl exposure on marble burying, self-grooming behaviors, sociability tests, and locomotor activities in BTBR T+ Itpr3tf/J (BTBR) mice. We also explored the possible molecular mechanism underlying the effects of MeHgCl administration on IFN-gamma-, T-bet-, IL-9-, and IL-17A-producing CD4+, CXCR5+, CXCR6+, and CCR9+ cells isolated from spleens. Furthermore, the effects of MeHgCl exposure on the mRNA expression and levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the brain tissue and serum samples were also assessed. Our results demonstrated that MeHgCl exposure caused a significant increase in marble burying, self-grooming behaviors and a decrease in social interactions and adverse effects on locomotor activity in BTBR mice. MeHgCl exposure also significantly increased the production of CD4+IFN-gamma+, CD4+T-bet+, CCR9+T-bet+, CXCR5+IL-9+, CD4+IL-9+, CXCR6+IL-17A+, and CD4+IL-17A+ cells in the spleen. Furthermore, MeHgCl exposure increased mRNA and protein levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the brain and serum respectively in BTBR mice. In conclusion, MeHgCl administration aggravated existing behavioral and immune abnormalities in BTBR mice.
35258097|a|Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is one of the most concerning health issues in which the normal brain function may be disrupted as a result of a blow, bump, or jolt to the head. Loss of consciousness, amnesia, focal neurological defects, alteration in mental state, and destructive diseases of the nervous system such as cognitive impairment, Parkinson's, and Alzheimer's disease. Parkinson's disease is a chronic progressive neurodegenerative disorder, characterized by the early loss of striatal dopaminergic neurons. TBI is a major risk factor for Parkinson's disease. Existing therapeutic approaches have not been often effective, indicating the necessity of discovering more efficient therapeutic targets. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway responds to different environmental cues to modulate a large number of cellular processes such as cell proliferation, survival, protein synthesis, autophagy, and cell metabolism. Moreover, mTOR has been reported to affect the regeneration of the injured nerves throughout the central nervous system (CNS). In this context, recent evaluations have revealed that mTOR inhibitors could be potential targets to defeat a group of neurological disorders, and thus, a number of clinical trials are investigating their efficacy in treating dementia, autism, epilepsy, stroke, and brain injury, as irritating neurological defects. The current review describes the interplay between mTOR signaling and major CNS-related disorders (esp. neurodegenerative diseases), as well as the mTOR signaling-TBI relationship. It also aims to discuss the promising therapeutic capacities of mTOR inhibitors during the TBI.
35257593|a|Canada is home to a mosaic of cultures with immigrant communities from a wide range of countries, but there are significant variations in how autism spectrum disorder (ASD) may be understood across different immigrant groups, including Sri Lankan Tamils. Such gaps in knowledge may present challenges for immigrant families that are trying to access appropriate care for their child, including occupational therapy services. This descriptive qualitative study aimed to better understand the experiences of immigrant Sri Lankan Tamil parents of children diagnosed with ASD in Southern Ontario, Canada. Interviews were analyzed using an in-depth content analysis. Results demonstrated parents' perceived supports and barriers towards ASD intervention planning, and indicated that parents were generally satisfied by the level of cultural competence in current ASD systems. However, families may still experience significant immigrant-related barriers that are not fully addressed. Recommendations to improve cultural awareness among occupational therapists utilizing ASD interventions are suggested.
35257592|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Recently, researchers have been interested in how autistic people experience loneliness. Yet, most of this research has focused on loneliness in autistic children and young people. We present the results of a systematic review on loneliness in autistic adults. A systematic review is a rigorous way of searching for all existing research on a topic and summarizing the findings about specific questions. We searched for all research published on this topic until 9 April 2021. We found 34 articles that investigated loneliness in autistic adults. This research showed that (1) there is fairly little research that has involved directly asking autistic adults about their first-hand experiences of loneliness (e.g. what loneliness feels like for them); (2) few research studies have used loneliness questionnaires specifically developed for autistic adults (this was attempted in just one research study); (3) collective loneliness (i.e. loneliness associated with how much an autistic person feels they 'fit in' to society) seems important to autistic adults but has not been investigated as commonly as other aspects of loneliness (e.g. loneliness associated with romantic relationships or friendships); (4) things that might increase loneliness in autistic adults include anxiety and depression, and a lack of autism understanding and acceptance, for example; and (5) things that might reduce loneliness in autistic adults include having relationships and self-acceptance, for example. In our article, we discuss the kinds of future research on loneliness in autistic adults that might be useful.
35257591|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Autism spectrum disorder is an early onset neurodevelopmental disorder and diagnosis can be made as early as 18 months of age. Early diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder is critical as it leads to early intervention. Age of autism spectrum disorder diagnosis has been linked to the child profile as autism spectrum disorder is characterized by strong heterogeneity, but is also influenced by socio-economic factors. There is paucity of data on age of diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder in France. We therefore examined the age of autism spectrum disorder diagnosis in 554 children and adolescents enrolled in the ELENA cohort study with respect to the influences of child profile, family antecedents, and socio-economic factors. The mean age of diagnosis was 4.9 years (+-2.8 years). Early diagnosis, before 3 years of age, was related to the co-occurrence of intellectual disability, higher autism spectrum disorder symptom severity, and lower communicative abilities. Children in low socio-economic status families tended to have an earlier diagnosis, but these children also had greater degree of intellectual impairment compared to children in high socio-economic status families. The age of autism spectrum disorder diagnosis was not associated with the presence of an older sibling with autism spectrum disorder. The observed current trend of an inverse relationship between socio-economic status and age of diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder suggests equitable access to autism spectrum disorder services in France where health coverage is universal and free. Better screening of more subtle/less severe forms of autism spectrum disorder is needed, as well as further assessment of the link between the co-occurrence of autism spectrum disorder and intellectual impairment in children in lower socio-economic status families.
35257373|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a heterogenous neurodevelopment disorder resulting from different etiological factors, both genetic and/or environmental. These factors can lead to abnormal neuronal development on dendrite and synaptic function at the central nervous system. Recent studies have shown that a subset of ASD patients display increased circulation levels of the tyrosine metabolite, p-cresol, related to chronic intestinal disorders due to dysbiosis of the intestinal microbiota. In particular, abnormal presence of intestinal Clostridium sp. has been linked to high levels of p-cresol in ASD children younger than 8 years. However, the role of p-cresol during development of the central nervous system is unknown. Here, we evaluated in vitro the effect of p-cresol on neurite outgrowth in N2a and PC12 cell lines and dendritic morphology, synaptic density, neuronal activity, and calcium responses in primary rat hippocampal neurons. p-cresol inhibits neural differentiation and neurites outgrowth in N2a and PC12 neuronal cell lines. In hippocampal neuronal cultures, Sholl s analysis shows a decrease in the dendritic arborization of neurons treated with p-cresol. Synaptic density analyzed with the synaptic markers Piccolo and Shank2 is diminished in hippocampal neurons treated with p-cresol. Electrically-evoked intracellular calcium rise was drastically, but reversely, blocked by p-cresol, whereas that spontaneous neuronal activity was severely affected by early addition of the metabolite. These findings show that p-cresol alters dendrite development, synaptogenesis and synapse function of neurons in culture, therefore, neuronal alterations occurring in ASD children may be related to this metabolite and dysbiosis of the intestinal microbiota.
35256815|a|Single-nuclei RNA sequencing characterizes cell types at the gene level. However, compared to single-cell approaches, many single-nuclei cDNAs are purely intronic, lack barcodes and hinder the study of isoforms. Here we present single-nuclei isoform RNA sequencing (SnISOr-Seq). Using microfluidics, PCR-based artifact removal, target enrichment and long-read sequencing, SnISOr-Seq increased barcoded, exon-spanning long reads 7.5-fold compared to naive long-read single-nuclei sequencing. We applied SnISOr-Seq to adult human frontal cortex and found that exons associated with autism exhibit coordinated and highly cell-type-specific inclusion. We found two distinct combination patterns: those distinguishing neural cell types, enriched in TSS-exon, exon-polyadenylation-site and non-adjacent exon pairs, and those with multiple configurations within one cell type, enriched in adjacent exon pairs. Finally, we observed that human-specific exons are almost as tightly coordinated as conserved exons, implying that coordination can be rapidly established during evolution. SnISOr-Seq enables cell-type-specific long-read isoform analysis in human brain and in any frozen or hard-to-dissociate sample.
35255969|a|BACKGROUND: Although autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a common developmental disorder, our knowledge about a behavioral and neurobiological female phenotype is still scarce. As the conceptualization and understanding of ASD are mainly based on the investigation of male individuals, females with ASD may not be adequately identified by routine clinical diagnostics. The present machine learning approach aimed to identify diagnostic information from the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) that discriminates best between ASD and non-ASD in females and males. METHODS: Random forests (RF) were used to discover patterns of symptoms in diagnostic data from the ADOS (modules 3 and 4) in 1057 participants with ASD (18.1% female) and 1230 participants with non-ASD (17.9% % female). Predictive performances of reduced feature models were explored and compared between females and males without intellectual disabilities. RESULTS: Reduced feature models relied on considerably fewer features from the ADOS in females compared to males, while still yielding similar classification performance (e.g., sensitivity, specificity). LIMITATIONS: As in previous studies, the current sample of females with ASD is smaller than the male sample and thus, females may still be underrepresented, limiting the statistical power to detect small to moderate effects. CONCLUSION: Our results do not suggest the need for new or altered diagnostic algorithms for females with ASD. Although we identified some phenotypic differences between females and males, the existing diagnostic tools seem to sufficiently capture the core autistic features in both groups.
35255466|a|The current study examined whether there was significant relationship among family functioning (cohesion and adaptability) and overall family satisfaction in parents with a child with autism spectrum disorder. It was predicted that poor family adaptive functioning, poor family cohesion along with other family-related variables (child diagnosis, parents' marital status, and other siblings in the family) would predict lower levels of family satisfaction. 73 mothers and 27 fathers of a child with ASD participated in this study. Google forms were used in this electronic web research. Data were collected using the Family Adaptability and Cohesion Evaluation Scale (FACES-III) and the Family satisfaction scale (FSS). This study's results demonstrate that family adaptability along with a child's autism spectrum disorder diagnosis may be significant predictors of family satisfaction. Findings report the significance of identifying discrepancies in family functioning as they provide an insight into how family members not only view but also how they interact with each other which in turn can inform clinical interventions and the therapeutic work.
35255304|a|Astrocytes are the most abundant cell type in the human central nervous system, and they play an important role in the regulation of neuronal physiology. In neurological disorders, astrocyte disintegration leads to the release of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) from tissue into the bloodstream. Elevated serum levels of GFAP can serve as blood biomarkers, and a useful prognostic tool to facilitate the early diagnosis of several neurological diseases ranging from stroke to neurodegenerative disorders. This systematic review synthesizes studies published between January 2012 and September 2021 that used GFAP as a potential blood biomarker to detect neurological disorders. The following electronic databases were accessed: MEDLINE, Scopus, and Web of Science. In all the databases, the following search strategy was used:  GFAP  OR  glial fibrillary acidic protein  AND  neurological  OR  neurodegenerative  AND  plasma  OR  serum . The initial search identified 1152 articles. After the exclusion criteria were applied, 48 publications that reported GFAP levels in neurological disorders were identified. A total of16 different neurological disorders that have plasmatic GFAP levels as a possible biomarker for the disease were described in the articles, being: multiple sclerosis, frontotemporal lobar degeneration, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson disease, COVID-19, epileptic seizures, Wilson Disease, diabetic ketoacidosis, schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorders, major depressive disorder, glioblastoma, spinal cord injury, asthma, neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder and Friedreich's ataxia. Our review shows an association between GFAP levels and the disease being studied, suggesting that elevated GFAP levels are a potentially valuable diagnostic biomarker in the evaluation of different neurological diseases.
35254616|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD), also known as childhood autism, is a common neurological developmental disorder. Although it is generally believed that genetic factors are a primary cause for ASD development, more and more studies show that an increasing number of ASD diagnoses are related to environmental exposure. Epidemiological studies indicated that perinatal exposure to endocrine disruptors might cause neurodevelopmental disorders in children. Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) is widely used as a plasticizer in many products. To explore the neurodevelopmental effect induced by perinatal exposure to DEHP on rat offspring, and the potential mechanisms, female Wistar rats were exposed to 1, 10, and 100 mg/kg/day DEHP during pregnancy and lactation, while valproic acid (VPA) was used as a positive control. The behavior tests showed that rat pups exposed to VPA and 100 mg/kg/day DEHP were not good as those from the control group in both their socialability and social novelty. Expression of mTOR pathway-related components increased while the number of autophagosomes decreased in the brain tissue of the rat offspring exposed to 100 mg/kg/day DEHP. In addition, perinatal exposure to DEHP at all dosages decreased the level of autophagy proteins LC3II and Beclin1 in the brain tissue of rat pups. Our results indicated that perinatal DEHP exposure would induce ASD-like behavioral changes in rat offspring, which might be mediated by activation of the mTOR signaling pathway, and inhibition of autophagy in the brain.
35254600|a|Autism and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) often co-occur. This survey of 288 New Zealand parents of children diagnosed with autism (n = 111), ADHD (n = 93), or both conditions (n = 84), examined the relations between age of diagnosis and early atypical development, the age specialist consultation was needed and types of specialists seen. Co-occurring autism and ADHD was associated with an earlier ADHD diagnosis and a later autism diagnosis. Parents of children with both diagnoses reported less atypical development in language and social behaviours compared to parents of children of autism, and this co-occurring group also experienced longer wait times to diagnosis, and saw more types of specialists prior to a diagnosis, than those with autism.
35254443|a|Oxytocin is hypothesized to promote social interactions by enhancing the salience of social stimuli. While previous neuroimaging studies have reported that oxytocin enhances amygdala activation to face stimuli in autistic men, effects in autistic women remain unclear. In this study, the influence of intranasal oxytocin on activation and functional connectivity of the basolateral amygdala - the brain's "salience detector" - while processing emotional faces vs. shapes was tested in 16 autistic and 21 non-autistic women by fMRI in a placebo-controlled, within-subjects, cross-over design. In the placebo condition, minimal activation differences were observed between autistic and non-autistic women. However, significant drug x group interactions were observed for both basolateral amygdala activation and functional connectivity. Oxytocin increased left basolateral amygdala activation among autistic women (35 voxel cluster, MNI coordinates of peak voxel= -22 -10 -28; mean change=+0.079%, t=3.159, ptukey=0.0166), but not non-autistic women (mean change =+0.003%, t=0.153, ptukey=0.999). Furthermore, oxytocin increased functional connectivity of the right basolateral amygdala with brain regions associated with socio-emotional information processing in autistic women, but not non-autistic women, attenuating group differences in the placebo condition. Taken together, these findings extend evidence of oxytocin's effects on the amygdala to specifically include autistic women and specify the subregion of the effect.
35254265|a|BACKGROUND: On May 8, 2021, Elon Musk, a well-recognized entrepreneur and business magnate, revealed on a popular television show that he has Asperger syndrome. Research has shown that people's perceptions of a condition are modified when influential individuals in society publicly disclose their diagnoses. It was anticipated that Musk's disclosure would contribute to discussions on the internet about the syndrome, and also to a potential change in the perception of this condition. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to compare the types of information contained in popular tweets about Asperger syndrome as well as their engagement and sentiment before and after Musk's disclosure. METHODS: We extracted tweets that were published 1 week before and after Musk's disclosure that had received >30 likes and included the terms "Aspergers" or "Aspie." The content of each post was classified by 2 independent coders as to whether the information provided was valid, contained misinformation, or was neutral. Furthermore, we analyzed the engagement on these posts and the expressed sentiment by using the AFINN sentiment analysis tool. RESULTS: We extracted a total of 227 popular tweets (34 posted the week before Musk's announcement and 193 posted the week after). We classified 210 (92.5%) of the tweets as neutral, 13 (5.7%) tweets as informative, and 4 (1.8%) as containing misinformation. Both informative and misinformative tweets were posted after Musk's disclosure. Popular tweets posted before Musk's disclosure were significantly more engaging (received more comments, retweets, and likes) than the tweets posted the week after. We did not find a significant difference in the sentiment expressed in the tweets posted before and after the announcement. CONCLUSIONS: The use of social media platforms by health authorities, autism associations, and other stakeholders has the potential to increase the awareness and acceptance of knowledge about autism and Asperger syndrome. When prominent figures disclose their diagnoses, the number of posts about their particular condition tends to increase and thus promote a potential opportunity for greater outreach to the general public about that condition.
35253848|a|
35253597|a|Multiple birth is one of several perinatal factors associated with increased risk for autism spectrum disorder (ASD); however, complexity in its relationship to ASD symptoms and developmental functioning remains. The present study investigated perinatal risk factors for ASD, primarily focusing on birth status, within a large early intervention sample. In particular, the relationship between ASD, perinatal factors, and the effect of birth status on developmental functioning and ASD symptom severity were examined in youth with and without ASD classification who were born singly or were the product of a multiple birth. Overall, the presence of other perinatal risk factors, including prematurity, low birth weight, and advanced parental age, was primarily related to birth status and not to ASD classification, while severity of ASD symptoms and developmental impairments were primarily related to ASD classification and not to birth status. Study findings and implications for early screening of children with developmental delays are discussed.
35253451|a|Cerebral palsy (CP) is a lifelong disability characterized by the impairment of brain functions that result in improper posture and abnormal motor patterns. Understanding this brain abnormality and the role of genetic, epigenetic, and non-genetic factors such as signaling pathway dysregulation and cytokine dysregulation in the pathogenesis of CP is a complex process. Hypoxic-ischemic injury and prematurity are two well-known contributors of CP. Like in the case of other neurodevelopmental disorders such as intellectual disability and autism, the genomic constituents in CP are highly complex. The neuroinflammation that is triggered by maternal cytokine response plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of fetal inflammation response, which is one of the contributing factors of CP, and it continues even after the birth of children suffering from CP. Canonical Wnt signaling pathway is important for the development of mammalian fetal brain and it regulates distinct processes including neurogenesis. The glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) antagonistic activity in the Wnt signaling pathway plays a crucial role in neurogenesis and neural development. In this review, we investigated several genetic and non-genetic pathways that are involved in the pathogenesis of CP and their regulation, impairment, and implications for causing CP during embryonic growth and developmental period. Investigating the role of these pathways help to develop novel therapeutic interventions and biomarkers for early diagnosis and treatment. This review also helps us to comprehend the mechanical approach of various signaling pathways, as well as their consequences and relevance in the understanding of CP.
35253243|a|BACKGROUND: Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) remain vulnerable during the Covid-19 outbreak due to significant changes to their daily routines, social interactions and diets. In addition, these challenges may be exacerbated for children living in low- and middle-income countries (LMIC) such as South Africa where there are already barriers such as poverty, access to resources and availability of support. Understanding the impact of the Covid-19 outbreak on children with ASD is imperative in order to create awareness as well as provide equitable services and support to both children with ASD and their families. PURPOSE: The study aimed to explore family-reported changes for children with ASD and their reactions and responses to the Covid-19 restrictions in South Africa. METHOD: A qualitative research design was employed. Twelve families consisting of different family compositions with a total of 21 family members (mothers, fathers and grandmothers) participated in the current study using semistructured interviews. Data were transcribed and analysed using a framework method for thematic analysis. RESULTS: Findings indicated that children with ASD present with unique challenges related to Covid-19. Negative themes such as children's obstructive reactions due to the immediate changes to their routines, increases in emotional dysregulation as well as loss of previously acquired skills as a result of lack of access to services during lockdown were reported. However, families also reported on positive changes such as improved social interactions as children became more accustomed to their new lockdown routines. IMPLICATIONS: The Covid-19 response has had a negative impact on children with disabilities, specifically around access to services and support for both children with ASD and their families. While the future of the virus and impending lockdown measures is unknown, clinicians, providers and educators need to ensure that provisions are made for children's current adjustments as well as further adjustments to their current routines both during and after the pandemic.
35253192|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a broad diagnostic category describing a group of neurodevelopmental disorders which includes the autistic disorder. Failure to develop normal social relationships is a hallmark of autism. An inability to understand and cope with the social environment can occur regardless of IQ. One of the hypotheses of the appearance of ASD symptoms is associated with the theory of mind (TOM). ASD patients do not have the ability to attribute the full range of mental states (goal states and epistemic states) to themselves and to others. Eye-tracking allows for observation of early signs of TOM in ASD individuals, even before they are 1 year old, without the need of developed motor and language skills. This provides a window for looking at the very basics of mindreading - detecting intentionality and eyes in our environment. Studies show that ASD children fail to recognize biological motion, while being highly sensitive to physical contingency within the random movement. Their perception of faces seems disorganized and undirected, while object recognition is intact. Evidence suggests that this orientation of attention following gaze cues is diminished in ASD patients. Available data also show deficits in emotion recognition, that cannot be accounted for by impairments in face processing or visual modality alone. Such observations provide an insight into disturbances of information processing and offer an explanation for poor social functioning of ASD patients. When combined with other methods, Eye-tracking has the potential to reveal differences in processing information on a neural circuitry level. Thus, it may help in understanding the complexity of TOM mechanisms, and their role in social functioning.
35250672|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is the commonest neurodevelopmental disability. It is a highly complex disorder with an increasing prevalence and an unclear etiology. Consensus indicates that ASD arises as a genetically modulated, and environmentally influenced condition. Although pathogenic rare genetic variants are detected in around 20% of cases of ASD, no single factor is responsible for the vast majority of ASD cases or that explains their characteristic clinical heterogeneity. However, a growing body of evidence suggests that ASD susceptibility involves an interplay between genetic factors and environmental exposures. One such environmental exposure which has received significant attention in this regard is maternal immune activation (MIA) resulting from bacterial or viral infection during pregnancy. Reproducible rodent models of ASD are well-established whereby induction of MIA in pregnant dams, leads to offspring displaying neuroanatomical, functional, and behavioral changes analogous to those seen in ASD. Blockade of specific inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-17A during gestation remediates many of these observed behavioral effects, suggesting a causative or contributory role. Here, we review the growing body of animal and human-based evidence indicating that interleukin-17A may mediate the observed effects of MIA on neurodevelopmental outcomes in the offspring. This is particularly important given the current corona virus disease-2019 (COVID-19) pandemic as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection during pregnancy is a potent stimulator of the maternal immune response, however the long-term effects of maternal SARS-CoV-2 infection on neurodevelopmental outcomes is unclear. This underscores the importance of monitoring neurodevelopmental outcomes in children exposed to SARS-CoV-2-induced MIA during gestation.
35250667|a|Self-other distinction is a crucial aspect of social cognition, as it allows us to differentiate our own mental and emotional states from those of others. Research suggests that this ability might be impaired in individuals on the autism spectrum, but convincing evidence of self-other distinction difficulties in the emotional domain is lacking. Here we aimed at evaluating emotional self-other distinction abilities in autistic and non-autistic adults, in two behavioral pilot studies and one fMRI study. By using a newly developed virtual ball-tossing game that induced simultaneous positive and negative emotional states in each participant and another person, we were able to measure emotional egocentric and altercentric biases (namely the tendency to ascribe self-/other-related emotions to others/ourselves, respectively). Despite no behavioral differences, individuals on the autism spectrum showed decreased activation (1) in the right temporoparietal junction (rTPJ) during active overcoming of the emotional egocentric bias vs. passive game viewing, and (2) in the right supramarginal gyrus (rSMG) during ego- vs. altercentric biases, compared to neurotypical participants. These results suggest a different recruitment of these two regions in autistic individuals when dealing with conflicting emotional states of oneself and another person. Furthermore, they highlight the importance of considering different control conditions when interpreting the involvement of rTPJ and rSMG during self-other distinction processes.
35250660|a|It is well-documented that autism can be reliably diagnosed by age two and that early signs emerge most often between 18 and 24 months. However, despite the increased awareness and focus on early diagnosis, the average age of diagnosis is over 4 years old; even later for Black children and those who are Medicaid-eligible. In this paper, we will propose a framework for accurate and accelerated autism diagnosis for children before age three. The proposed framework emphasizes a collaborative diagnostic process, which relies heavily on Birth to Three provider knowledge and expertise. Considerations for next steps are presented. This approach could increase access to diagnosis of young children soon after first signs of autism emerge.
35250650|a|The classical approach to autism spectrum disorders (ASD) is often limited to considering their neuro-functional aspects. However, recent scientific literature has shown that ASDs also affect many body systems and apparatuses such as the immune system, the sensory-motor system, and the gut-brain axis. The connective tissue, a common thread linking all these structures, may have a pathogenetic role in the multisystem involvement of ASD. Depending on its different anatomical sites, the connective tissue performs functions of connection and support; furthermore, it acts as a barrier between the external and internal environments, regulating the interchange between the two and performing immunological surveillance. The connective tissue shares a close relationship with the central nervous system, the musculoskeletal system and the immune system. Alterations in brain connectivity are common to various developmental disorders, including ASD, and for this reason here we put forward the hypothesis that alterations in the physiological activity of microglia could be implicated in the pathogenesis of ASD. Also, muscle hypotonia is likely to clinically correlate with an altered sensoriality and, in fact, discomfort or early muscle fatigue are often reported in ASDs. Furthermore, patients with ASD often suffer from intestinal dysfunctions, malabsorption and leaky gut syndrome, all phenomena that may be linked to reduced intestinal connectivity. In addition, at the cutaneous and subcutaneous levels, ASDs show a greater predisposition to inflammatory events due to the lack of adequate release of anti-inflammatory mediators. Alveolar-capillary dysfunctions have also been observed in ASD, most frequently interstitial inflammations, immune-mediated forms of allergic asthma, and bronchial hyper-reactivity. Therefore, in autism, altered connectivity can result in phenomena of altered sensitivity to environmental stimuli. The following interpretative model, that we define as the "connectivome theory," considers the alterations in connective elements of common mesodermal origin located in the various organs and apparatuses and entails the evaluation and interpretation of ASDs through also highlighting somatic elements. We believe that this broader approach could be helpful for a more accurate analysis, as it is able to enrich clinical evaluation and define more multidisciplinary and personalized interventions.
35250481|a|
35250452|a|Synaptic gene conditions, i.e., "synaptopathies," involve disruption to genes expressed at the synapse and account for between 0.5 and 2% of autism cases. They provide a unique entry point to understanding the molecular and biological mechanisms underpinning autism-related phenotypes. Phelan-McDermid Syndrome (PMS, also known as 22q13 deletion syndrome) and NRXN1 deletions (NRXN1ds) are two synaptopathies associated with autism and related neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). PMS often incorporates disruption to the SHANK3 gene, implicated in excitatory postsynaptic scaffolding, whereas the NRXN1 gene encodes neurexin-1, a presynaptic cell adhesion protein; both are implicated in trans-synaptic signaling in the brain. Around 70% of individuals with PMS and 43-70% of those with NRXN1ds receive a diagnosis of autism, suggesting that alterations in synaptic development may play a crucial role in explaining the aetiology of autism. However, a substantial amount of heterogeneity exists between conditions. Most individuals with PMS have moderate to profound intellectual disability (ID), while those with NRXN1ds have no ID to severe ID. Speech abnormalities are common to both, although appear more severe in PMS. Very little is currently known about the neurocognitive underpinnings of phenotypic presentations in PMS and NRXN1ds. The Synaptic Gene (SynaG) study adopts a gene-first approach and comprehensively assesses these two syndromic forms of autism. The study compliments preclinical efforts within AIMS-2-TRIALS focused on SHANK3 and NRXN1. The aims of the study are to (1) establish the frequency of autism diagnosis and features in individuals with PMS and NRXN1ds, (2) to compare the clinical profile of PMS, NRXN1ds, and individuals with 'idiopathic' autism (iASD), (3) to identify mechanistic biomarkers that may account for autistic features and/or heterogeneity in clinical profiles, and (4) investigate the impact of second or multiple genetic hits on heterogeneity in clinical profiles. In the current paper we describe our methodology for phenotyping the sample and our planned comparisons, with information on the necessary adaptations made during the global COVID-19 pandemic. We also describe the demographics of the data collected thus far, including 25 PMS, 36 NRXN1ds, 33 iASD, and 52 NTD participants, and present an interim analysis of autistic features and adaptive functioning.
35249876|a|OBJECTIVE: To investigate the mechanism of valproic acid (VPA) -induced impairment of the dendritic spines and synapses in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) for causing core symptoms of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in mice. METHODS: Female C57 mice were subjected to injections of saline or VPA on gestational days 10 and 12, and the male offspring mice in the two groups were used as the normal control group and ASD model group (n=10), respectively. Another 20 male mice with fetal exposure to VPA were randomized into two groups for stereotactic injection of DMSO or Wortmannin into the PFC (n=10). Open field test, juvenile play test and 3-chamber test were used to evaluate autistic behaviors of the mice. The density of dendrite spines in the PFC was observed with Golgi staining. Western blotting and immunofluorescence staining were used to detect the expressions of p-PI3K, PI3K, p-AKT, AKT, p-mTOR, mTOR and the synaptic proteins PSD95, p-Syn, and Syn in the PFC of the mice. RESULTS: Compared with the normal control mice, the mice with fetal exposure to VPA exhibited obvious autism-like behaviors with significantly decreased density of total, mushroom and stubby dendritic spines (P < 0.05) and increased filopodia dendritic spines (P < 0.05) in the PFC. The VPA-exposed mice also showed significantly increased expressions of p-PI3K/PI3K, p-AKT/AKT, and p-mTOR/mTOR (P < 0.01) and lowered expressions of PSD95 and p-Syn/Syn in the PFC (P < 0.05 or 0.001). Wortmannin injection into the PFC obviously improved the ASD-like phenotype and dendritic spine development, down-regulated PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway and up-regulated the synaptic proteins in VPA-exposed mice. CONCLUSION: In male mice with fetal exposure to VPA, excessive activation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway and decreased expressions of the synaptic proteins PSD95 and p-Syn cause dendritic spine damage and synaptic development disturbance in the PFC, which eventually leads to ASD-like phenotype.
35249798|a|BACKGROUND: Hospitalized children and young adults with multihandicaps (MLH) often present with behavioral and relational disorders that are mainly related to their difficulties in communicating and interacting with their environments. Educational support is rarely provided to these patients. An intensive multimodal educative program could help in reducing behavioral disorders and in improving the quality of life of healthcare workers, including nurses and auxiliary nurses. METHODS: A multicenter, randomized controlled trial compared the impact of the usual practice of an educative program (1 h a week) to a multimodal intensive educative program (5 h a week) at 12 months. Patients aged 3-25 with MLH defined by the combination of five criteria (motor deficiency, severe-to-profound mental impairment, daily life dependence, restricted mobility, onset of cerebral lesion at younger than 3 years, and at least one behavioral disorder per week [withdrawn behavior, unexplained crying, teeth grinding, self-injury, aggression, stereotypy, or merycism]) were included. The primary outcome was the evolution of the predominant behavioral disorder between study inclusion and 12 months. Healthcare workers completed questionnaires about chronic stress, coping strategies, and quality of life at study inclusion and at 12 months. RESULTS: Overall, 60 patients were included. Despite a tendency toward reduced teeth grinding, withdrawn and self-injury behaviors, the intervention was not significantly effective: The median duration of continuous behavioral disorders (stereotypy, unexplained crying, withdrawn behavior, and teeth grinding) did not differ between groups. The median frequency of the discontinuous behavioral disorders (self-injury) did not differ between groups. Considering each disorder separately, there was a decrease in teeth grinding, self-injury, and autistic-like traits in the intervention group, although it did not reach statistical significance. This study also suggested decreased depersonalization feelings by healthcare workers. CONCLUSION: Although the study did not show a significant reduction in behavioral disorders in patients with MLH, these results encourage further evaluation of educational management, particularly in regard to patients with self-injury and with withdrawn and teeth-grinding behaviors.
35249769|a|PURPOSE: This study aimed to assess psychological distress and its gender difference in parents of children with ASD. Predictive factors for parental psychological distress and interaction effects between parents were also explored. DESIGN AND METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted for parents of children with ASD and 683 mother-father dyads were included in the analyses. RESULTS: Mothers of children with severe autistic symptoms reported significantly higher levels of stress, anxiety, and depression than fathers. The prevalence of moderate-to-severe anxiety and depression for mothers was 13.8% and 13.1%, respectively. The corresponding prevalence for fathers was 9.9% and 8.0%, respectively. A college education or above protected against maternal stress and an only child predicted paternal stress. Child social impairment predicted maternal but not paternal psychological distress. Stress was a significant predictor of anxiety and depression for both parents. Paternal stress and anxiety moderated the relationship between child's social impairment and maternal stress, and paternal anxiety moderated the relationship between child's social impairment and maternal depression. CONCLUSIONS: The gender difference in the parental psychological distress depends on the severity of children's autistic symptoms. Child social impairment exerts significant effects on mothers' psychological distress and parental stress contributes to anxiety and depression for both parents. The psychological distress of fathers moderates the relationship between child social impairment and maternal psychological distress. IMPLICATIONS: Health-care professionals should pay special attention to parents who are susceptible to psychological distress. Social skill interventions for children and stress reduction programs for parents are recommended to promote parental psychological well-being.
35249682|a|Audio-visual recording and location tracking produce enormous quantities of digital data with which researchers can document children's everyday interactions in naturalistic settings and assessment contexts. Machine learning and other computational approaches can produce replicable, automated measurements of these big behavioral data. The economies of scale afforded by repeated automated measurements offer a potent approach to investigating linkages between real-time behavior and developmental change. In our work, automated measurement of audio from child-worn recorders-which quantify the frequency of child and adult speech and index its phonemic complexity-are paired with ultrawide radio tracking of children's location and interpersonal orientation. Applications of objective measurement indicate the influence of adult behavior in both expert ratings of attachment behavior and ratings of autism severity, suggesting the role of dyadic factors in these "child" assessments. In the preschool classroom, location/orientation measures provide data-driven measures of children's social contact, fertile ground for vocal interactions. Both the velocity of children's movement toward one another and their social contact with one another evidence homophily: children with autism spectrum disorder, other developmental disabilities, and typically developing children were more likely to interact with children in the same group even in inclusive preschool classrooms designed to promote interchange between all children. In the vocal domain, the frequency of peer speech and the phonemic complexity of teacher speech predict the frequency and phonemic complexity of children's own speech over multiple timescales. Moreover, children's own speech predicts their assessed language abilities across disability groups, suggesting how everyday interactions facilitate development.
35249540|a|BACKGROUND: Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common childhood behavioral condition that globally affects an average of around 5% of children and is associated with several adverse life outcomes. Comorbidity with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is highly prevalent. Pharmacological treatment for ADHD symptoms has been shown to be effective. However, the prevailing perception is that children with ADHD and concomitant ASD symptoms report poorer efficacy and more side effects. This has been supported by studies on this population, but prospective studies directly comparing children with ADHD and different levels of ASD symptoms are lacking. We aimed to assess if children with ADHD and concomitant ASD symptoms differ regarding effects and side-effects of pharmacological ADHD treatment compared to children with ADHD without ASD traits. This is to our knowledge the second study to directly compare the effect of ADHD medication between ADHD patients with different levels of ASD symptoms. METHODS: In a non-randomized, observational, prospective cohort study, 323 patients aged 6 to 17 years who were diagnosed with ADHD and starting pharmacological treatment were divided into two groups: one with high level of ASD symptoms (ASD group, N=71) and one with low level of ASD symptoms (non-ASD group, N = 252). Treatment outcome was measured as ADHD symptoms, and evaluated using the Swanson, Nolan and Pelham Teacher and Parent ADHD rating scale-version IV (SNAP-IV). Side-effects were evaluated using the Pediatric Side Effects Checklist (P-SEC), at 3 months follow-up. RESULTS: From baseline to 3 months, there was no significant difference in neither treatment effect nor number of clinically significant adverse events experienced between the ASD group and the non-ASD group. CONCLUSIONS: Our results did not implicate that ADHD patients with concomitant ASD symptoms have decreased treatment effect of ADHD medication than patients with ADHD without concomitant ASD symptoms. Neither did the results support that ADHD patients with ASD symptoms experienced significantly more side-effects than ADHD patients without ASD symptoms. Although, we did not analyze different medications separately, this is in line with the only previous study directly comparing methylphenidate treatment in children with or without ASD. TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT02136147 , May 12, 2014.
35249508|a|Neuropsychiatric disorders that affect the central nervous system cause considerable pressures on the health care system and have a substantial economic burden on modern societies. The present treatments based on available drugs are mostly ineffective and often costly. The molecular process of neuropsychiatric disorders is closely connected to modifying the genetic structures inherited or caused by damage, toxic chemicals, and some current diseases. Gene therapy is presently an experimental concept for neurological disorders. Clinical applications endeavor to alleviate the symptoms, reduce disease progression, and repair defective genes. Implementing gene therapy in inherited and acquired neurological illnesses entails the integration of several scientific disciplines, including virology, neurology, neurosurgery, molecular genetics, and immunology. Genetic manipulation has the power to minimize or cure illness by inducing genetic alterations at endogenous loci. Gene therapy that involves treating the disease by deleting, silencing, or editing defective genes and delivering genetic material to produce therapeutic molecules has excellent potential as a novel approach for treating neuropsychiatric disorders. With the recent advances in gene selection and vector design quality in targeted treatments, gene therapy could be an effective approach. This review article will investigates and reports the newest and the most critical molecules and factors in neuropsychiatric disorder gene therapy. Different genome editing techniques available will be evaluated, and the review will highlight preclinical research of genome editing for neuropsychiatric disorders while also evaluating current limitations and potential strategies to overcome genome editing advancements.
35249372|a|LAY ABSTRACT: This study adds to a growing body of research documenting feeding problems in autistic children. Our results indicate that children aged 1.5-5 years with feeding problems may present with elevated internalizing difficulties and alterations in sensory processing when compared to same-age children without feeding problems. Our study also proposes that sensory processing may be an important, mediating factor in the relationship between autism features and feeding problems. The present work suggests, therefore, that implementers should thoroughly consider the sensory profile of autistic children prior to intervening on feeding behaviors. In particular, based on these preliminary findings, feeding interventions could benefit from environments designed to support children who can find them noisy and overwhelming.
35249357|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Autistic young people may struggle in mainstream schools and feel disconnected from their peers and their school. We know that autistic adults can benefit from spending time with other autistic people, but we don't know if this is the case for younger autistic people. We conducted interviews with 13 autistic young adults in the United Kingdom who recently left mainstream schooling. We asked them if they would have been interested in being involved in autistic peer support when they were at school, and if so, what that peer support should look like. Results indicated that autistic young people were enthusiastic about the idea of peer support. They thought it was important that peer support was flexible to suit their needs at different times, as well as inclusive, positive, and embracing neurodiversity. They also discussed the potential benefits and difficulties of having a peer support system within a school setting. This adds to the growing body of research on the potential benefits of autistic-autistic interactions on autistic people's well-being and sense of belonging. Findings can be used to help design pilot peer support projects in schools that can be tested to see how effective they are.
35248844|a|OBJECTIVES: We aimed to estimate the prevalence of autism spectrum disorder between 2 and 4 years old in Riyadh, Saudi Arabi Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted among Saudi children aged 2-4 years between December 2017 and March 2018 at five different hospitals in Riyadh. RESULTS: A Total of 398 children were included. The prevalence of ASD was estimated to be (2.51%, 1:40, 25 per 1000)), with a male to female ratio of 3:1. CONCLUSION: The estimated high prevalence rate of ASD is close to recent trends in international studies. Future population-based studies are required.
35248688|a|Neurofibromatosis (NF) and tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) are the two most common neurocutaneous disorders, both transmitted as autosomal dominant or in the case of NF, also as a mosaic conditions. The causative genetic mutations in these neurocutaneous disorders can lead to benign skin changes or uninhibited growth and proliferation in multiple organ systems due to the loss of tumor suppression in MAPK and mTOR signaling pathways. Common clinical features include NF include pigmented lesions, known as cafe au lait patches, neurofibromas, intertriginous freckles (Crowe's sign), and benign fibrous growths, such as hamartomas in multiple organ systems, and in TS, hypopigmented macules known as ash-leaf spots in addition to neurologic sequelae, such as autism, seizures, and developmental delays. Advances in genetic sequencing technologies have allowed an exponential expansion in the understanding of both NF and TSC. Consensus criteria have been established for both diagnoses that can be confirmed in most cases through gene testing. Once diagnosed, both the clinical and diagnostic value of disease specific surveillance include early identification of benign and malignant tumors. Genetic counseling is important for informed reproductive decision making for both patients and at-risk family members. The improvement in understanding of pathways of pathogenic disease development and oncogenesis in both conditions have produced a new series of therapeutic options that can be used to control seizures and tumor growth. Tremendous advances in life expectancy and quality of life are now a reality due to early introduction of seizure control and novel medications. While we lack cures, early institution of interventions, such as seizure control in tuberous sclerosis, appears to be disease-modifying and holds immense promise to offer patients better lives.
35248005|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are a set of developmental, psychological, and neurological disorders that occur in early childhood. The most important characteristic of individuals with autism is difficulty in social interactions and communication. Researchers in the field of oral health have not paid enough attention to these individuals due to their specific behavioral characteristics. Therefore, due to the limitations of the studies in this field in Iran, increasing prevalence of autism, and importance of oral health in people with ASD, this study was conducted to evaluate the oral health status of primary school students with autism (7-15 years old) in autism schools in Tehran. METHODS: Students from seven governmental special primary schools in Tehran were selected for this study. Data about oral health behavior and the presence of each of the seven barriers of tooth brushing task was collected via questionnaires completed by parents. During the dental examination, the cooperation level according to the Frankle Index, oral hygiene status according to the Simplified Oral Hygiene Index, and caries experience (DMFT) of the students were recorded by a calibrated dentist. A psychologist assessed the level of ASD using the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM5). Data analysis including descriptive and regression analysis was done using the SPSS software version 24. RESULTS: Two hundred and seventeen students aged 7-15 years participated in this study, of whom 65.4% brushed their teeth once or more every day, 85.7% had sugary snacks twice or less per day, 73.7% used fluoridated tooth paste, and 80% brushed their teeth with parents' help. The most common barrier to tooth brushing was difficulty in brushing (51.6%). The cooperation level was definitely positive in 46.1%. The mean Simplified Oral Hygiene Index (OHI-S) and caries experience (DMFT) scores were 1.92 +- 0.55 and 2.36 +- 2.38, respectively. CONCLUSION: The clinical indices of OHI-S and caries experience (DMFT) were used to evaluate the oral health status in the students with ASD in Tehran, Iran. A better oral hygiene status was related to higher brushing frequency and lower sweet snack consumption. The findings of the present study indicate that educational interventions regarding oral hygiene and healthy diet may improve oral self-care in individuals with ASD.
35247972|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by repetitive behaviors, deficits in communication, and overall impaired social interaction. Of all the integrin subunit mutations, mutations in integrin beta3 (Itgb3) may be the most closely associated with ASD. Integrin beta3 is required for normal structural plasticity of dendrites and synapses specifically in excitatory cortical and hippocampal circuitry. However, the behavioral consequences of Itgb3 function in the forebrain have not been assessed. We tested the hypothesis that behaviors that are typically abnormal in ASD-such as self-grooming and sociability behaviors-are disrupted with conditional Itgb3 loss of function in forebrain circuitry in male and female mice. METHODS: We generated male and female conditional knockouts (cKO) and conditional heterozygotes (cHET) of Itgb3 in excitatory neurons and glia that were derived from Emx1-expressing forebrain cells during development. We used several different assays to determine whether male and female cKO and cHET mice have repetitive self-grooming behaviors, anxiety-like behaviors, abnormal locomotion, compulsive-like behaviors, or abnormal social behaviors, when compared to male and female wildtype (WT) mice. RESULTS: Our findings indicate that only self-grooming and sociability are altered in cKO, but not cHET or WT mice, suggesting that Itgb3 is specifically required in forebrain Emx1-expressing cells for normal repetitive self-grooming and social behaviors. Furthermore, in cKO (but not cHET or WT), we observed an interaction effect for sex and self-grooming environment and an interaction effect for sex and sociability test chamber. LIMITATIONS: While this study demonstrated a role for forebrain Itgb3 in specific repetitive and social behaviors, it was unable to determine whether forebrain Itgb3 is required for a preference for social novelty, whether cHET are haploinsufficient with respect to repetitive self-grooming and social behaviors, or the nature of the interaction effect for sex and environment/chamber in affected behaviors of cKO. CONCLUSIONS: Together, these findings strengthen the idea that Itgb3 has a specific role in shaping forebrain circuitry that is relevant to endophenotypes of autism spectrum disorder.
35246983|a|Brain arteriovenous malformations (bAVMs) are infrequent disorders in the pediatric population. The rupture of a bAVM is a clinical emergency often followed by death. Autism spectrum disorder shares a number of symptoms with AVM malformation; this may impede antemortem diagnosis. An 11-year-old boy with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) without other medical history died suddenly. Initially, choking on a peanut butter sandwich was suspected; autopsy did not demonstrate aspiration, but identified a ruptured right cerebellar AVM, with the characteristic tortuous vessels. The histology on the lesion confirmed the presence of arterialized veins and showed gliotic tissue and hemosiderin-laden macrophages, consistent with prior bleeding. BAVM pathogenesis is unknown; congenital disease may have several mechanisms including genetic predisposition and familial risk factors; development de novo may occur after hemorrhagic intracranial events such as surgical intervention and head trauma. ASD may present with overlapping symptoms of bAVM and may also interfere with expressing subtle neurologic symptoms to caretakers. ASD and AVM are rarely reported in association.
35246237|a|BACKGROUND: There is still no approved medication for the core symptoms of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). This network meta-analysis investigated pharmacological and dietary-supplement treatments for ASD. METHODS: We searched for randomized-controlled-trials (RCTs) with a minimum duration of seven days in ClinicalTrials.gov, EMBASE, MEDLINE, PsycINFO, WHO-ICTRP (from inception up to July 8, 2018), CENTRAL and PubMed (up to November 3, 2021). The co-primary outcomes were core symptoms (social-communication difficulties-SCD, repetitive behaviors-RB, overall core symptoms-OCS) measured by validated scales and standardized-mean-differences (SMDs). Associated symptoms, e.g., irritability/aggression and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) symptoms, dropouts and important side-effects, were investigated as secondary outcomes. Studies in children/adolescents and adults were analyzed separately in random-effects pairwise and network meta-analyses. RESULTS: We analyzed data for 41 drugs and 17 dietary-supplements, from 125 RCTs (n = 7450 participants) in children/adolescents and 18 RCTs (n = 1104) in adults. The following medications could improve at least one core symptom domain in comparison with placebo: aripiprazole (k = 6 studies in analysis, SCD: SMD = 0.27 95% CI [0.09, 0.44], RB: 0.48 [0.26, 0.70]), atomoxetine (k = 3, RB:0.49 [0.18, 0.80]), bumetanide (k = 4, RB: 0.35 [0.09, 0.62], OCS: 0.61 [0.31, 0.91]), and risperidone (k = 4, SCM: 0.31 [0.06, 0.55], RB: 0.60 [0.29, 0.90]; k = 3, OCS: 1.18 [0.75, 1.61]) in children/adolescents; fluoxetine (k = 1, RB: 1.20 [0.45, 1.96]), fluvoxamine (k = 1, RB: 1.04 [0.27, 1.81]), oxytocin (k = 6, RB:0.41 [0.16, 0.66]) and risperidone (k = 1, RB: 0.97 [0.21,1.74]) in adults. There were some indications of improvement by carnosine, haloperidol, folinic acid, guanfacine, omega-3-fatty-acids, probiotics, sulforaphane, tideglusib and valproate, yet imprecise and not robust. Confidence in these estimates was very low or low, except moderate for oxytocin. Medications differed substantially in improving associated symptoms, and in their side-effect profiles. LIMITATIONS: Most of the studies were inadequately powered (sample sizes of 20-80 participants), with short duration (8-13 weeks), and about a third focused on associated symptoms. Networks were mainly star-shaped, and there were indications of reporting bias. There was no optimal rating scale measuring change in core symptoms. CONCLUSIONS: Some medications could improve core symptoms, although this could be likely secondary to the improvement of associated symptoms. Evidence on their efficacy and safety is preliminary; therefore, routine prescription of medications for the core symptoms cannot be recommended. Trial registration PROSPERO-ID CRD42019125317.
35246105|a|PURPOSE: Women of reproductive age who carry fragile X premutation (PM) alleles have 56 to 200 CGG repeats in the 5'-untranslated region of FMR1 gene are at increased risk for producing children with intellectual disabilities (ID) or autism spectrum disorders (ASD) due to expansion of PM alleles to full mutation alleles (> 200 repeats) during maternal transmission. METHODS: In present study fragile X PM carrier screening was performed in total 808 women who were consulting primary health care centers for preconception care in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa region of Pakistan between April, 2018 and December, 2020. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed for detection of PM carrier women and the CGG repeats number was confirmed by Southern blotting and capillary electrophoresis. RESULTS: The prevalence rate for PM carriers among preconception women was found to be 0.7% that was contributed by 0.5% women in risk group (RG1) with family history of ID and 0.2% in risk group 2 (RG2) with family history of ASD. PM carrier women had at least one affected child or sibling. In addition, the preconception women with FMR1 PM alleles were found to be at increased risk for primary ovary insufficiency (RG1: P = 0.0265, RG2: P = 0.0389), postpartum depression (RG1: P = 0.0240, RG2: P = 0.0501) and neuropsychiatric disorders (RG1: P = 0.0389, RG2: P = 0.0432). CONCLUSIONS: Current study provides first evidence of fragile X PM carrier screening in Pakistani preconception women in primary care consultation. Findings of current study may help to improve preconception care and to reduce burden of fragile X associated disorders in our population.
35246073|a|BACKGROUND: CHARGE syndrome is a relatively common cause of deafness and blindness resulting from failure to form the primordia of specific organs due to deficient contribution of neural crest cell derivatives. The majority of CHARGE syndrome cases are caused by heterozygous mutations in CHD7 on chromosome 8q21. Those with CHARGE syndrome without CHD7 mutation typically do not have an identified genetic defect. 7q11.23 duplication syndrome is associated with mild facial dysmorphism, heart defects, language delay, and autism spectrum disorder. In the current literature, 7q11.23 duplication has not been associated with CHARGE syndrome, retinochoroidal colobomas, or significant ear abnormalities. CASE PRESENTATION: We describe a patient with 7q11.23 duplication syndrome and clinical CHARGE syndrome with no variant in CHARGE-associated genes. CONCLUSIONS: This case highlights the still incomplete understanding of the pathogenesis of CHARGE syndrome and raises the possibility of a dose-sensitive effect of genes in the 7q11.23 critical region on neural crest differentiation and fate.
35245680|a|Allergic inflammation during pregnancy increases risk for a diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disorders such as Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) in the offspring. Previously, we found a model of such inflammation, allergy-induced maternal immune activation (MIA), produced symptoms analogous to those associated with neurodevelopmental disorders in rats, including reduced juvenile play behavior, hyperactivity, and cognitive inflexibility. These behaviors were preceded by perinatal changes in microglia colonization and phenotype in multiple relevant brain regions. Given the role that microglia play in synaptic patterning as well as evidence for altered synaptic architecture in neurodevelopmental disorders, we investigated whether allergic MIA altered the dynamics of dendritic spine patterning throughout key regions of the rat forebrain across neurodevelopment. Adult virgin female rats were sensitized to the allergen, ovalbumin, with alum adjuvant, bred, and allergically challenged on gestational day 15. Brain tissue was collected from male and female offspring on postnatal days (P) 5, 15, 30, and 100-120 and processed for Golgi-Cox staining. Mean dendritic spine density was calculated for neurons in brain regions associated with cognition and social behavior, including the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), basal ganglia, septum, nucleus accumbens (NAc), and amygdala. Allergic MIA reduced dendritic spine density in the neonatal (P5) and juvenile (P15) mPFC, but these mPFC spine deficits were normalized by P30. Allergic inflammation reduced spine density in the septum of juvenile (P30) rats, with an interaction suggesting increased density in males and reduced density in females. MIA-induced reductions in spine density were also found in the female basal ganglia at P15, as well as in the NAc at P30. Conversely, MIA-induced increases were found in the NAc in adulthood. While amygdala dendritic spine density was generally unaffected throughout development, MIA reduced density in both medial and basolateral subregions in adult offspring. Correlational analyses revealed disruption to amygdala-related networks in the neonatal animals and cortico-striatal related networks in juvenile and adult animals in a sex-specific manner. Collectively, these data suggest that communication within and between these cognitive and social brain regions may be altered dynamically throughout development after prenatal exposure to allergic inflammation. They also provide a basis for future intervention studies targeted at rescuing spine and behavior changes via immunomodulatory treatments.
35244973|a|Humans have evolved to seek the proximity of attachment figures during times of threat in order to obtain a sense of safety. In this context, we examined whether or not the voice of an intimate partner (termed "attachment voice") could reduce fear-learning of conditioned stimuli (CS+) and enhance learning of safety signals (CS-). Although the ability to learn safety signals is vital for human survival, few studies have explored how attachment voices affect safety learning. To test our hypothesis, we recruited thirty-five young couples and performed a classic Pavlovian conditioning experiment, recording behavioral and electroencephalographic (EEG) data. The results showed that compared with a stranger's voice, the voices of the partners reduced expectancy of the unconditioned stimulus (a shock) during fear-conditioning, as well as the magnitude of P2 event-related potentials within the EEG responses, provided the voices were safety signals. Additionally, behavioral and EEG responses to the CS+ and CS- differed more when the participants heard their partner's voice than when they heard the stranger's voice. Thus, attachment voices, even as pure vowel sounds without any semantic information, enhanced acquisition of conditioned safety (CS-). These findings may provide implications for investigating other new techniques to improve clinical treatments for fear- and anxiety-related disorders and for psychological interventions against the mental health effects of the public health emergency.
35244867|a|PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To summarize recent findings regarding anxiety and trauma-related disorders in children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (autism), focusing on the distinct ways in which these conditions may be expressed, as well as advances in evidence-based assessment and treatment. RECENT FINDINGS: Current findings suggest both anxiety and trauma-related disorders may be more prevalent, yet more complicated to address in autistic relative to non-autistic children. Overlapping symptoms and distinct manifestations of these disorders pose challenges for the accurate identification, assessment, and treatment of anxiety and trauma-related disorders in autistic children. Emerging evidence recommends adapting traditional assessment and treatment approaches to better meet the needs of autistic children. Recent research suggests autism-centered conceptualizations, which accommodate complexity in how anxiety and trauma-related disorders are experienced and expressed by autistic people, are needed to enhance the psychiatric care of this population.
35244837|a|There is limited research regarding the Gilliam Autism Rating Scales-3rd Edition (GARS-3) despite its extensive use. A comprehensive diagnostic evaluation, including the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule-2nd Edition (ADOS-2) was provided to 186 clinically referred children suspected of autism ([Formula: see text] age = 8.98; Autism [AUT] n = 87; Not Autism [NOT] n = 99). Mean difference analyses, Logistic Regressions, and ROC analyses were non-significant for both Autism Index scores. The author-suggested cutoff score of 70 correctly classified approximately 47% of participants, with false positive rates = 82.83-87.88%. ADOS-2 correlations were significantly lower vis-a-vis the standardization sample. The Social Interaction subscale demonstrated weak, marginal results, and sensitivity/specificity could not be optimized. In its current form, the GARS-3 does not demonstrate adequate criterion validity for use in assessment of complex community samples.
35244836|a|While Extended Reality (XR) autism research, ranging from Augmented to Virtual Reality, focuses on socio-emotional abilities and autistic children requiring low support, common interventions address the entire spectrum and focus on other abilities, including perceptual abilities. Based on these observations, this paper first addresses common practitioners' interventions, and then suggests XR use cases and guidelines to better support them. To do so, 34 interviews were conducted with stakeholders, mainly including practitioners, and then analyzed. Emerging XR use cases were compared with the findings from two former systematic literature reviews, and emerging design guidelines were compared with the findings from a literature survey that we conducted. Findings suggest that collaborative XR sensory-based and mediation approaches could benefit the entire spectrum.
35244626|a|PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to assess an intellectual disability (ID) cohort with keratoconus (KC) regarding ophthalmic (visual acuity and corneal tomography) and systemic characteristics and to describe an appropriate clinical algorithm for investigation and management of KC in this setting. METHODS: This was the retrospective cohort study of patients with ID (Down syndrome, autism, and other) in the cornea department of a tertiary referral ophthalmic hospital in Dublin, Ireland. Retrospective chart review was conducted on people with ID undergoing examination under anesthesia or crosslinking under general anesthetic. Key outcome data included corneal examination findings, corneal tomography, visual acuity, and examination findings (eg, type of ID, general anesthetic, and cardiac status). RESULTS: Mean age of the 24 patients was 31.9 years (66.7% male). ID type was Down syndrome (66.7%), autism (25%), and other (8.3%). KC was diagnosed in 98% of eyes, with 45.8% having untreatable advanced disease (57.1% of these bilateral), 39.6% amenable to corneal collagen crosslinking (35.7% of these bilateral), and 6.3% having corneal transplantation. Congenital heart defects were present in 37.5% of the Down syndrome group. There were no serious ocular or systemic adverse events. CONCLUSIONS: KC is strikingly prevalent in the ID population. Ireland has the highest rate of Down syndrome in Europe (26.3:10,000 live births). This group is rarely suitable for corneal transplantation, and corneal collagen crosslinking is an effective intervention to prevent progression to advanced KC in this already socially restricted group. We propose an algorithm for investigation/treatment and also recommend uniform pediatric KC screening/treatment in ID populations.
35244219|a|BACKGROUND: Due to familial liability, siblings of children with ASD exhibit elevated risk for language delays. The processes contributing to language delays in this population remain unclear. METHODS: Considering well-established links between attention to dynamic audiovisual cues inherent in a speaker's face and speech processing, we investigated if attention to a speaker's face and mouth differs in 12-month-old infants at high familial risk for ASD but without ASD diagnosis (hr-sib; n = 91) and in infants at low familial risk (lr-sib; n = 62) for ASD and whether attention at 12 months predicts language outcomes at 18 months. RESULTS: At 12 months, hr-sib and lr-sib infants did not differ in attention to face (p = .14), mouth preference (p = .30), or in receptive and expressive language scores (p = .36, p = .33). At 18 months, the hr-sib infants had lower receptive (p = .01) but not expressive (p = .84) language scores than the lr-sib infants. In the lr-sib infants, greater attention to the face (p = .022) and a mouth preference (p = .025) contributed to better language outcomes at 18 months. In the hr-sib infants, neither attention to the face nor a mouth preference was associated with language outcomes at 18 months. CONCLUSIONS: Unlike low-risk infants, high-risk infants do not appear to benefit from audiovisual prosodic and speech cues in the service of language acquisition despite intact attention to these cues. We propose that impaired processing of audiovisual cues may constitute the link between genetic risk factors and poor language outcomes observed across the autism risk spectrum and may represent a promising endophenotype in autism.
35244195|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a lifelong neurodevelopmental condition characterized by impaired social interaction, compromised communication, and restrictive or stereotyped behaviours and interests. Due to the complex pathophysiology of ASD, there are currently no available medical therapies for improving the associated social deficits. Consequently, the present study investigated the effects of STX209, a selective gamma-aminobutyric acid type B receptor (GABABR2) agonist, on an environmental rodent model of autism. The mouse model of autism induced by prenatal exposure to valproic acid (VPA) was used to assess the therapeutic potential of STX209 on autism-like behaviour in the present study. This study investigated the effects of STX209 on VPA model mice via behavioral testing and revealed a significant reversal of core/associated autism-like behavior, including sociability and preference for social novelty, novelty recognition, locomotion and exploration activity and marble-burying deficit. This may be associated with STX209 correcting dendritic arborization, spine density and GABABR2 expression in hippocampus of VPA model mice. However, expression of glutamic acid decarboxylase 65/67 in the hippocampus were not altered by STX209. The present results demonstrated that STX209 administration ameliorated autism-like symptoms in mice exposed to VPA prenatally, suggesting that autism-like symptoms in children with a history of prenatal VPA exposure may also benefit from treatment with the GABABR2 agonist STX209.
35244056|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by impairments in social communication, social interaction, and restrictive or repetitive behaviors. Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) has been used in the clinical management of ASD, especially in mainland China, where studies have shown promising efficacy. However, this remains to be further explored and clarified. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of conventional treatment-based TCM interventions for ASD. METHOD: The study will be conducted from January 2022, and the following electronic databases will be searched: China Biological Medicine Database, Chinese Scientific Journals Database, Wan Fang database, and China National Knowledge Infrastructure, the Cochrane Library, Web of Science, PubMed, and EMBASE Database. Only randomized controlled trials of TCM interventions for ASD will be included. The Autism Diagnostic Observation Scale, Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised, and Childhood Autism Rating Scale will be the primary outcome indicators. The methodological quality of this Bayesian-based network meta-analysis will be performed using the "Risk of Bias" tool. Stata 14.0 and WinBUGS 1.4.3 will be used to analyze the data. In addition, assessment of heterogeneity, inconsistency, subgroups, sensitivity, and publication bias will be conducted using the Cochrane Collaboration's tools. RESULTS: The results of this study will be submitted to a peer-reviewed journal for publication. CONCLUSION: This study will help patients recover better, provide clinical evidence for practitioners, and promote the use of TCM in ASD interventions.
35243807|a|Early detection of autism risk in the community is critical to increasing families' access to early intervention, yet few measures have been developed and tested for the general population of infants <16 months to tap a broader range of autism risk constructs. This study aimed to (a) examine the factor structure of the First Years Inventory, version 3.1 (FYIv3.1), with a sample of 6454 infants 6-16 months, and (b) determine the ability of the resulting factors to discriminate clinical outcome groups at 3 years of age. The FYIv3.1 is a parent-report tool designed to detect early behavioral risk signs that may be associated with a later diagnosis of ASD and related neurodevelopmental conditions. Factor analytic models were used to determine the number of constructs and inter-factor correlations. Findings supported a seven-factor structure: communication, imitation and play (CIP); social attention and affective engagement (SAE); sensory hyperresponsiveness (HYPER); sensory hyporesponsiveness (HYPO); self-regulation in daily routines (SREG); sensory interests, repetitions, and seeking behaviors (SIRS); motor coordination and milestones (MCM). Mean comparisons on these factors demonstrated significant discrimination of the three outcome groups at age 3 years including those classified as having an ASD diagnosis and/or high autism symptoms, those classified as having other developmental disorders/conditions/concerns, and those classified with no known conditions/concerns. These findings support the validity and multidimensionality of early ASD risk constructs, as well as the potential use of the FYIv3.1 for phenotypic subtyping in the general population, and early detection in a broader age range of 6-16 months in future clinical studies. LAY SUMMARY: The FYIv3.1 is a 69-item parent-report questionnaire about infant behaviors that may indicate an elevated likelihood for later neurodevelopmental conditions such as autism. Analyses of responses from 6454 parents of infants 6-16 months indicated that items could be grouped reliably into seven categories. Compared to children with or without other developmental conditions, children in the outcome group with autism spectrum disorder and/or high autism symptoms at age three showed more behavioral risk signs in social-communication, sensory, and motor domains during infancy.
35243238|a|The cytoskeletal protein NDE1 plays an important role in chromosome segregation, neural precursor differentiation, and neuronal migration. Clinical studies have shown that NDE1 deficiency is associated with several neuropsychiatric disorders including autism. Here, we generated nde1 homologous deficiency zebrafish (nde1 -/- ) to elucidate the cellular molecular mechanisms behind it. nde1 -/- exhibit increased neurological apoptotic responses at early infancy, enlarged ventricles, and shrank valvula cerebelli in adult brain tissue. Behavioral analysis revealed that nde1 -/- displayed autism-like behavior traits such as increased locomotor activity and repetitive stereotype behaviors and impaired social and kin recognition behaviors. Furthermore, nde1 mRNA injection rescued apoptosis in early development, and minocycline treatment rescued impaired social behavior and overactive motor activity by inhibiting inflammatory cytokines. In this study, we revealed that nde1 homozygous deletion leads to abnormal neurological development with autism-related behavioral phenotypes and that inflammatory responses in the brain are an important molecular basis behind it.
35242894|a|Background: Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is triggered by environmental stressors. Empathy may predispose an individual to respond to life events differently if high empathizers are emotionally more sensitive to trauma. For the first time, we test this hypothesis using genetic information. Methods: We applied polygenic scoring (PGS) to investigate the shared genetics linking empathy (measured using the Empathy Quotient (EQ), a self-report measure of empathy; N = 46,861) and PTSD symptom severity (measured using the 6-item PTSD Checklist 6-item (PCL-6)) in the UK Biobank (N = 126,219). Follow-up analyses were performed in the context of (1) experiencing any of 16 potential traumas, (2) the total number of traumas endorsed, and (3) the context of trauma. Autism, depression, generalized anxiety, and PCL-17 PGS were included as covariates to verify the specificity of the effect. Results: EQPGS associated with PCL-6 (R 2  = 0.012%, P = 9.35 x 10-5). This effect remained significant after accounting for autism, depression, PTSD, and anxiety PGS but was observed only in those who endorsed experiencing at least one traumatic event. EQPGS showed the strongest effect on PCL-6 (beta = 2.32, s.e. = 0.762, P = 0.002) among those who endorsed childhood neglect/abuse (felt hated as a child). With respect to case status, the highest probability of PTSD was 17.93% and 10.04% for those who endorsed "feeling hated as a child" and those who did not, respectively (P diff = 0.011; Cohen's d = 1.951, 95%CI 1.70-2.20). Conclusions: A genetic predisposition to higher empathy, which may index greater emotional sensitivity, predisposes an individual to more severe PTSD symptoms, especially after early-life adversity.
35242606|a|Cognitive impairment is a well-recognized key feature of schizophrenia. Here we review the evidence on (1) the onset and sensitive periods of change in cognitive impairment before and after the first psychotic episode, and (2) heterogeneity in neurocognitive presentations across cognitive domains between and within individuals. Overall, studies suggest that mild cognitive impairment in individuals who develop schizophrenia or related disorders is already present during early childhood. Cross-sectional studies further suggest increasing cognitive impairments from pre- to post-psychosis onset, with the greatest declines between adolescence, the prodrome, and the first psychotic episode and with some variability between domains. Longitudinal studies with more than 10 years of observation time are scarce but support mild cognitive declines after psychosis onset until late adulthood. Whether and how much this cognitive decline exceeds normal aging, proceeds further in older patients, and is specific to certain cognitive domains and subpopulations of patients remains to be investigated. Finally, studies show substantial heterogeneity in cognitive performance in schizophrenia and suggest a variety of impairment profiles. This review highlights a clear need for long-term studies that include a control group and individuals from adolescence to old age to better understand critical windows of cognitive change and their predictors. The available evidence stresses the importance of interventions that aim to counter cognitive decline during the prodromal years, as well as careful assessment of cognition in order to determine who will profit most from which cognitive training.
35242063|a|Individuals with developmental disabilities present with perceptuo-motor, social communication, and cognitive impairments that often relate to underlying atypical brain structure and functioning. Physical activity/movement interventions improve behavioral performance of individuals with and without developmental disabilities. Majority of the evidence on potential neural mechanisms explaining the impact of physical activity/movement interventions is based on studies in individuals with typical development; there is a dearth of systematic reviews synthesizing the neural effects of physical activity/movement interventions in individuals with developmental disabilities. In this systematic review, we have gathered evidence on the neural effects of physical activity/movement interventions from 32 papers reporting substantial neural effects and behavioral improvements in individuals with developmental disabilities. Chronic intervention effects (multiple sessions) were greater than acute intervention effects (single session). Specifically, using electroencephalogram, functional magnetic resonance imaging, diffusion tensor imaging, and functional near-infrared spectroscopy, studies found physical activity/movement intervention-related changes in neural activity, indicating normalization of cortical arousal in individuals with attention-deficit /hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), increased social brain connectivity in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and more efficient executive functioning processes in individuals with a wide range of other developmental disabilities. Despite promising results, more research is clearly needed in this area with larger sample sizes, using standardized neuroimaging tools/variables, and across multiple diagnoses to further explore the neural mechanisms underlying physical activity/movement interventions and to replicate findings from the present review.
35242018|a|According to the shared signal hypothesis (SSH) the impact of facial expressions on emotion processing partially depends on whether the gaze is directed toward or away from the observer. In autism spectrum disorder (ASD) several aspects of face processing have been found to be atypical, including attention to eye gaze and the identification of emotional expressions. However, there is little research on how gaze direction affects emotional expression processing in typically developing (TD) individuals and in those with ASD. This question is investigated here in two multimodal experiments. Experiment 1 required processing eye gaze direction while faces differed in emotional expression. Forty-seven children (aged 9-12 years) participated. Their Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) scores ranged from 0 to 6 in the experiment. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were sensitive to gaze direction and emotion, but emotion processing did not depend on gaze direction. However, for angry faces the gaze direction effect on the N170 amplitude, as typically observed in TD individuals, diminished with increasing ADOS score. For neutral expressions this correlation was not significant. Experiment 2 required explicit emotion classifications in a facial emotion composite task while eye gaze was manipulated incidentally. A group of 22 children with ASD was compared to a propensity score-matched group of TD children (mean age = 13 years). The same comparison was carried out for a subgroup of nine children with ASD who were less trained in social cognition, according to clinician's report. The ASD group performed overall worse in emotion recognition than the TD group, independently of emotion or gaze direction. However, for disgust expressions, eye tracking data revealed that TD children fixated relatively longer on the eyes of the stimulus face with a direct gaze as compared with averted gaze. In children with ASD we observed no such modulation of fixation behavior as a function of gaze direction. Overall, the present findings from ERPs and eye tracking confirm the hypothesis of an impaired sensitivity to gaze direction in children with ASD or elevated autistic traits, at least for specific emotions. Therefore, we conclude that multimodal investigations of the interaction between emotional processing and stimulus gaze direction are promising to understand the characteristics of individuals differing along the autism trait dimension.
35241995|a|Objective: The purpose of this study is to assess the effectiveness of the use of sensory garments for improving sleep in children with autism spectrum disorder. Method: Using a single-subject ABAB reversal design, the researchers evaluated the effectiveness of a sensory garment on sleep duration, sleep latency, and parental stress related to a child's sleep. Four children aged 4-10 participated. We measured sleep duration and sleep latency using the Garmin watches and parent-report sleep logs, parent stress using the Parenting Stress Index Short Form, and sleep behaviors using the Children's Sleep Habits Questionnaire. Results/Discussion. Data showed variable effects on sleep duration and latency across children. The oldest child with the hyposensitive sensory patterns experienced the greatest sleep improvements. All parents experienced stress from daily life, and some reported increased stress due to study participation. Future research is recommended to further investigate the effectiveness of sensory garments on sleep for children with ASD. Therapists are encouraged to evaluate children's development and sensory preferences prior to recommending sensory garments for sleep.
35241813|a|Oxytocin (OT) and vasopressin (AVP) are conserved peptide signaling hormones that are critical for diverse processes including osmotic homeostasis, reproduction, lactation and social interaction. OT acts through the oxytocin receptor (OTR), a magnesium-dependent G protein-coupled receptor that is a therapeutic target for treatment of postpartum hemorrhage, dysfunctional labor and autism. However, the molecular mechanisms that underlie OTR activation by OT and the dependence on magnesium remain unknown. Here we present the wild-type active-state structure of human OTR bound to OT and miniGq/i determined by cryo-EM. The structure reveals a unique activation mechanism adopted by OTR involving both the formation of a Mg2+ coordination complex between OT and the receptor, and disruption of transmembrane helix 7 (TM7) by OT. Our functional assays demonstrate the role of TM7 disruption and provide the mechanism of full agonism by OT and partial agonism by OT analogs. Furthermore, we find that the identity of a single cation-coordinating residue across vasopressin family receptors determines whether the receptor is cation-dependent. Collectively, these results demonstrate how the Mg2+-dependent OTR is activated by OT, provide essential information for structure-based drug discovery efforts and shed light on the molecular determinants of cation dependence of vasopressin family receptors throughout the animal kingdom.
35241692|a|PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS), caused by germline PTEN mutations, has been associated with organ-specific cancers and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and/or developmental delay (DD). Predicting precise clinical phenotypes in any one PHTS individual remains impossible. We conducted an untargeted metabolomics study on an age- and sex-matched series of PHTS individuals with ASD/DD, cancer, or both phenotypes. Using agnostic metabolomic-analyses from patient-derived lymphoblastoid cells and their spent media, we found 52 differentially abundant individual metabolites, 69 cell/media metabolite ratios, and 327 pair-wise metabotype (shared metabolic phenotype) ratios clearly distinguishing PHTS individuals based on phenotype. Network analysis based on significant metabolites pointed to hubs converging on PTEN-related insulin, MAPK, AMPK, and mTOR signaling cascades. Internal cross-validation of significant metabolites showed optimal overall accuracy in distinguishing PHTS individuals with ASD/DD versus those with cancer. Such metabolomic markers may enable more accurate risk predictions and prevention in individual PHTS patients at highest risk.
35241668|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD), a group of neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by social communication deficits and stereotyped behaviors, may be associated with changes to the gut microbiota. However, how gut commensal bacteria modulate brain function in ASD remains unclear. Here, we used chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 8 (CHD8) haploinsufficient mice as a model of ASD to elucidate the pathways through which the host and gut microbiota interact with each other. We found that increased levels of amino acid transporters in the intestines of the mouse model of ASD contribute to the high level of serum glutamine and the increased excitation/inhibition (E/I) ratio in the brain. In addition, elevated alpha-defensin levels in the haploinsufficient mice resulted in dysregulation of the gut microbiota characterized by a reduced abundance of Bacteroides. Furthermore, supplementation with Bacteroides uniformis improved the ASD-like behaviors and restored the E/I ratio in the brain by decreasing intestinal amino acid transport and the serum glutamine levels. Our study demonstrates associations between changes in the gut microbiota and amino acid transporters, and ASD-like behavioral and electrophysiology phenotypes, in a mouse model.
35241030|a|BACKGROUND: Features of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) include difficulties in processing and interpreting socioemotional information. The "Reading the Mind in the Eyes" test (RMET) is a validated measurement for processing socioemotional ability. However, previous RMET studies did not explore patterns of incorrect answers and the emotional valence of the test items. This study used the Taiwanese version of the RMET and the network analysis methods to examine the differences in underlying mechanisms of socioemotional processes between 30 males with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (mean age = 18 years) and 30 healthy control males (mean age = 17 years). For each test item, a picture of a person's eyes and partial face was shown with four words describing the emotional status on picture corners. Participants were instructed to choose one of the four words that best matched the person's thinking or feeling. We further classified the words into three valences of emotional categories to examine socioemotional processes. RESULTS: Our results showed that ASD males performed poorer on the RMET than the controls. ASD males had higher network density and in-degree scores, especially in negative words, than control males. CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that males with ASD might have deficits in mapping the best emotional concept words to the target item, especially for processing negative emotion.
35240246|a|The biological mechanisms linking diet-related obesity and autism-related behaviors remain unclear. We aimed to characterize these interactions, focusing on gut microbiota, 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) levels, and autistic behaviors in an animal model for autism; a high-fat diet (HFD) BTBR T + Itpr3tf/J (BTBR) mouse. In this model, we also examined the medication effects of metformin (Met) which is known to ameliorate several symptoms of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Therefore, we hypothesized that HFD exacerbates BTBR autistic symptoms, which can be alleviated by Met, and the effects are associated with serotonin and the microbiota. As expected, compared with mice fed a normal diet, ten-week HFD-fed mice showed increased body weight, adiposity, and glucose levels. HFD consumption markedly aggravated repetitive behaviors in the self-grooming test. Met reduced HFD-induced hyperactivity. Notably, HFD intervention rescued sociability in the three-chamber sociability test. Furthermore, HFD stimulated tryptophan production, which was inhibited by Met. In contrast, 5-HT levels were lower in the gut and higher in the cortex in the HFD group. Moreover, Met suppressed inflammation in the hippocampus of HFD-fed mice by significantly downregulating the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (NF-kappaB, IL-17A, and IL-6). HFD increased the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio, and Met supplementation decreased richness while increasing bacterial diversity. We found that the abundance of gut microbiota (Lachnoclostridium, Anaerotruncus, Mucispirillum, and Lactococcus) was correlated with behavior scores and 5-HT levels. Overall, HFD consumption improved sociality in BTBR mice, which was related to the modulation of 5-HT levels and the composition of the microbiota. Met did not show any significant positive effects on the autism phenotype associated with HFD.
35239745|a|Caregivers of individuals with ASD can experience various practical, psychological, and social demands and need effective ways of coping to ameliorate the negative effects of caregiving. Numerous coping strategies are available, but the literature shows that caregivers can still struggle to cope, suggesting that interventions to support coping efforts could be beneficial. The MRC framework advocates the systematic development and evaluation of interventions, and this study was conducted to inform the future development of a self-help Positive Reappraisal Coping Intervention (PRCI) for these caregivers. The aim was to establish whether positive reappraisal coping strategies were used and associated with greater psychological wellbeing, prior to developing such an intervention. METHOD: Caregivers of individuals with ASD (N = 112) responded to items from an existing PRCI (Lancastle, 2006; Lancastle & Boivin, 2008), by writing about aspects of caregiving that reflected the meaning of each item. They also completed questionnaires assessing resilience, caregiving burden, and positive and negative emotions. RESULTS: Participants provided significantly more positive responses than negative responses to PRCI items, demonstrating their use of positive reappraisal coping. Thematic analyses showed that positive responses focused on factors such as their loved one's personality and achievements, the contributions caregivers had made to this person's progress, the support received, and their own personal development. Positive reappraisal coping was associated with greater resilience, more positive and less negative emotions, and a lesser sense of caregiver burden. CONCLUSION: This modelling study suggests that positive reappraisal strategies were used by caregivers and associated with greater psychological wellbeing. The findings will inform the development of a self-help PRCI for the caregivers of those with ASD. Future studies will systematically evaluate that PRCI to determine the nature of intervention effects and mediators and moderators of effects.
35239608|a|OBJECTIVE: Our study evaluates whether having an alternate developmental behavioral disorder (DBDs) diagnosis before diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) is associated with delays in diagnosis in a nationally representative sample. METHODS: Data were obtained from the 2011 National Survey of Pathways to Diagnosis and Services, a survey of children aged 6 to 17 years with ASD, developmental delay, or intellectual disability. A total of 1049 children met inclusion criteria for this study. Of these, 799 children were identified as "late" diagnosis if >12 months elapsed between the age parents reported concerns to a provider and age of ASD diagnosis and 250 as "timely" diagnosis if the gap was <=12 months. Univariate and multivariate logistic regressions were used to look for association between having an alternate DBDs diagnosed before ASD and "timely" versus "late" ASD diagnosis. RESULTS: The mean time elapsed between the age parents reported concerns to a provider and age of ASD diagnosis was 51 months for children with an alternate DBDs diagnosis before receiving ASD diagnosis and 29 months for those diagnosed with alternate DBDs concurrently with ASD. Having alternate DBDs diagnosis before diagnosis with ASD was associated with "late" ASD diagnosis as follows: developmental delay (adjusted odds ratio [aOR,] 3.46; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.86-6.42; p < 0.001), intellectual disability (aOR, 9.75; 95% CI, 3.0-31.60; p = 0.04), attention-deficit disorder (aOR, 11.07; 95% CI, 3.43-35.71; p < 0.001), depression (aOR, 8.05; 95% CI, 1.07-60.03; p = 0.0495), and behavioral conduct disorder (aOR, 9.9; 95% CI, 3.55-27.62; p < 0.001). CONCLUSION: These findings highlight the importance of research to improve the early diagnosis of ASD even in the presence of coexisting developmental behavioral disorders.
35239083|a|Parents of children with autism spectrum disorder and other disabilities report high levels of distress, but systematically evaluated interventions are few. This study aimed to evaluate the feasibility of a novel, manualized Acceptance and Commitment Therapy group intervention (Navigator ACT) in a sample of 94 parents of children with disabilities. Feasibility was measured by treatment completion, credibility, and satisfaction, and preliminary outcomes by using self-rating scales administered at the baseline, post-intervention, and follow-up. The results imply the intervention is feasible in the context of Swedish outpatient habilitation services. A preliminary analysis of the outcome measures suggests that parents experienced significant improvements in well-being. The results indicate that the treatment is feasible and should be evaluated in a randomized controlled trial.
35238292|a|BACKGROUND: Intellectual disability (ID) is associated with violent and sexual offending and victimization, but the importance of neuropsychiatric comorbidity and severity of disability remains unclear. METHODS: In a register-based cohort study of people born in Sweden 1980-1991 (n = 1 232 564), we investigated associations of mild and moderate/severe ID with any, violent and sexual crimes, and with assault victimization, stratified by comorbid autism and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). We defined ID by attendance at a special school or registered diagnosis and obtained data on criminal convictions and injuries or deaths due to assaults from nationwide registers until end of 2013. RESULTS: Compared to people without ID, autism or ADHD, men and women with mild or moderate/severe ID and comorbid ADHD had elevated risks of violent crimes [range of hazard ratios (HRs) 4.4-10.4] and assault victimization (HRs 2.0-7.7). Women with mild ID without comorbidities or with comorbid autism also had elevated risks of violent crimes and victimization (HRs 1.8-4.6) compared to women without ID, autism or ADHD. The relative risks of sexual offending and victimization were elevated in men and women with ID without comorbidities (HRs 2.6-12.7). The highest risks for sexual offending in men (HRs 9.4-11.0) and for sexual assault victimization in women (HRs 11.0-17.1) related to ID and comorbid ADHD. CONCLUSIONS: The elevated risk of violent offending and assault victimization in people with ID is largely explained by comorbid ADHD, whereas ID is independently associated with sexual crimes and victimization, even though absolute risks are low.
35238171|a|Prevalence estimates of autism are essential for informing public policy, raising awareness, and developing research priorities. Using a systematic review, we synthesized estimates of the prevalence of autism worldwide. We examined factors accounting for variability in estimates and critically reviewed evidence relevant for hypotheses about biological or social determinants (viz., biological sex, sociodemographic status, ethnicity/race, and nativity) potentially modifying prevalence estimates of autism. We performed the search in November 2021 within Medline for studies estimating autism prevalence, published since our last systematic review in 2012. Data were extracted by two independent researchers. Since 2012, 99 estimates from 71 studies were published indicating a global autism prevalence that ranges within and across regions, with a median prevalence of 100/10,000 (range: 1.09/10,000 to 436.0/10,000). The median male-to-female ratio was 4.2. The median percentage of autism cases with co-occurring intellectual disability was 33.0%. Estimates varied, likely reflecting complex and dynamic interactions between patterns of community awareness, service capacity, help seeking, and sociodemographic factors. A limitation of this review is that synthesizing methodological features precludes a quality appraisal of studies. Our findings reveal an increase in measured autism prevalence globally, reflecting the combined effects of multiple factors including the increase in community awareness and public health response globally, progress in case identification and definition, and an increase in community capacity. Hypotheses linking factors that increase the likelihood of developing autism with variations in prevalence will require research with large, representative samples and comparable autism diagnostic criteria and case-finding methods in diverse world regions over time. LAY SUMMARY: We reviewed studies of the prevalence of autism worldwide, considering the impact of geographic, ethnic, and socioeconomic factors on prevalence estimates. Approximately 1/100 children are diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder around the world. Prevalence estimates increased over time and varied greatly within and across sociodemographic groups. These findings reflect changes in the definition of autism and differences in the methodology and contexts of prevalence studies.
35238019|a|This prospective study examined the latent growth trajectories of sensory patterns among a North Carolina birth cohort (N = 1517; 49% boys, 87% White) across infancy (6-19 months), preschool (3-4 years), and school years (6-7 years). Change rates of sensory hyper- and hyporesponsiveness better differentiated children with an autism diagnosis or elevated autistic traits from those with other developmental conditions, including non-autistic children with sensory differences. More sensory hyper- and hyporesponsiveness at infancy followed by steeper increases differentially predicted more autistic traits at school age. Further, children of parents with higher education tended to show stable or improving trajectories. These findings highlight the importance of tracking sensory patterns from infancy for facilitating early identification of associated challenges and tailored support for families.
35237188|a|Approximately a third of children and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) experience significant irritability; despite this, no study has reviewed whether interventions for youth with ADHD can improve irritability. This mini review sought to address this gap in the literature by discussing existing pharmacological and psychosocial interventions for irritability among children and adolescents with ADHD. A literature search was conducted in April 2021, with a total of 12 intervention articles identified (six pharmacological, one psychosocial, five combined). Studies were excluded if they did not involve an intervention, a measure of irritability, or the population was not youth with ADHD. Of these articles, two were with an ADHD only sample; seven included ADHD with comorbid disruptive behavior, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (DMDD), or severe mood dysregulation (SMD); and three included ADHD with comorbid autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Findings suggest that central nervous system stimulants used alone or in combination with behavior therapy are effective at reducing irritability in youth with ADHD only or comorbid ADHD and DMDD/SMD. Less evidence was found for the efficacy of guanfacine and atomoxetine for youth with ADHD only or comorbid ADHD and ASD. Parent training alone or in combination with atomoxetine was found to be effective at reducing irritability in youth with comorbid ADHD and ASD. Future research assessing the efficacy of other psychosocial interventions, particularly cognitive behavioral therapy is necessary, as are randomized trials assessing intervention sequencing and intensity among youth with ADHD. Researchers are advised to utilize well-validated measures of irritability in future research.
35237135|a|One important aspect for managing social interactions is the ability to perceive and respond to facial expressions rapidly and accurately. This ability is highly dependent upon intact processing within both cortical and subcortical components of the early visual pathways. Social cognitive deficits, including face emotion recognition (FER) deficits, are characteristic of several neuropsychiatric disorders including schizophrenia (Sz) and autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Here, we investigated potential visual sensory contributions to FER deficits in Sz (n = 28, 8/20 female/male; age 21-54 years) and adult ASD (n = 20, 4/16 female/male; age 19-43 years) participants compared to neurotypical (n = 30, 8/22 female/male; age 19-54 years) controls using task-based fMRI during an implicit static/dynamic FER task. Compared to neurotypical controls, both Sz (d = 1.97) and ASD (d = 1.13) participants had significantly lower FER scores which interrelated with diminished activation of the superior temporal sulcus (STS). In Sz, STS deficits were predicted by reduced activation of early visual regions (d = 0.85, p = 0.002) and of the pulvinar nucleus of the thalamus (d = 0.44, p = 0.042), along with impaired cortico-pulvinar interaction. By contrast, ASD participants showed patterns of increased early visual cortical (d = 1.03, p = 0.001) and pulvinar (d = 0.71, p = 0.015) activation. Large effect-size structural and histological abnormalities of pulvinar have previously been documented in Sz. Moreover, we have recently demonstrated impaired pulvinar activation to simple visual stimuli in Sz. Here, we provide the first demonstration of a disease-specific contribution of impaired pulvinar activation to social cognitive impairment in Sz.
35237128|a|[This corrects the article DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2021.665686.].
35237118|a|Understanding the brain differences present at the earliest possible diagnostic age for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is crucial for delineating the underlying neuropathology of the disorder. However, knowledge of brain structural network changes in the early important developmental period between 2 and 7 years of age is limited in children with ASD. In this study, we aimed to fill the knowledge gap by characterizing age-related brain structural network changes in ASD from 2 to 7 years of age, and identify sensitive network-based imaging biomarkers that are significantly correlated with the symptom severity. Diffusion MRI was acquired in 30 children with ASD and 21 typically developmental (TD) children. With diffusion MRI and quantified clinical assessment, we conducted network-based analysis and correlation between graph-theory-based measurements and symptom severity. Significant age-by-group interaction was found in global network measures and nodal efficiencies during the developmental period of 2-7 years old. Compared with significant age-related growth of the structural network in TD, relatively flattened maturational trends were observed in ASD. Hyper-connectivity in the structural network with higher global efficiency, global network strength, and nodal efficiency were observed in children with ASD. Network edge strength in ASD also demonstrated hyper-connectivity in widespread anatomical connections, including those in default-mode, frontoparietal, and sensorimotor networks. Importantly, identified higher nodal efficiencies and higher network edge strengths were significantly correlated with symptom severity in ASD. Collectively, structural networks in ASD during this early developmental period of 2-7 years of age are characterized by hyper-connectivity and slower maturation, with aberrant hyper-connectivity significantly correlated with symptom severity. These aberrant network measures may serve as imaging biomarkers for ASD from 2 to 7 years of age.
35237049|a|Background: Parental advocacy is a dynamic process that changes depending on the circumstances and needs of the child and parent. Communication deficits related to an Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) diagnosis often necessitate parental advocacy. This study describes how parents and caregivers of children and youth diagnosed with ASD engage in parental advocacy, the challenges they encounter and the advocacy skills they develop. Method: We used descriptive exploratory methodology informed by reflexive thematic analysis. The aim of the study was to explore advocacy in parents and caregivers of children and youth diagnosed with ASD. Results: We conducted in-depth, semi-structured interviews with 15 parents of children and youth with an ASD diagnosis living in 4 provinces of Atlantic Canada. The pathway in parents' advocacy journey included: (1) Expressing concerns; (2) Seeking help, assessment, and diagnosis; (3) Acquiring services; (4) Removing barriers; and (5) Developing advocacy skills. Conclusions: Our findings illustrate the process of parental advocacy, skill development, and the barriers parents encounter in advocating for their children with ASD. Future research might explore how health professionals can support parents' advocacy efforts.
35236262|a|P2X7 receptors (Rs) are prominent members of the P2XR family which after binding ATP open non-selective cationic channels allowing the transmembrane passage of Na+, Ca2+ and K+. Long-lasting and repetitive stimulation of the receptor by its agonist leads to the formation of large membrane pores permeable for organic cations of up to 900 Da molecular size. These pores are believed to play a role in apoptosis and inflammation. P2X7Rs are located primarily at peripheral macrophages and at microglial cells, the resident macrophages of the CNS. The co-activation of toll-like receptors 4 (TLR4) by lipopolysaccharide, a constituent of the cell membrane of gram negative bacteria, and the P2X7R by ATP leads to the generation and release of the pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha. These cytokines together with the microglial release of chemokines, reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, proteases, and also the excitotoxic glutamate results in neurodegeneration. P2X7Rs were found not only to amplify various neurodegenerative illnesses such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and multiple sclerosis, but also to participate in a range of psychiatric diseases such as major depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorder. Based on the prevention/reversal of neuroinflammation, pharmacological antagonists of P2X7Rs and their genetic deletion in animal experiments counteracts these deleterious psychiatric conditions. Hence, brain penetrant P2X7R antagonists are potential therapeutics for psychiatric diseases, although the available evidence still needs to be extended and validated by further clinical data.
35236234|a|Active video gaming (AVG) is a way that children with neurodevelopmental disorders can participate in social play and could be associated with improvements in social behaviors. However, limited research has investigated if AVG is associated with improvements in social behaviors in children and adolescents with neurodevelopmental disorders. A systematic literature search was conducted in Medline, Embase, Psycinfo, Cinahl, and Eric, Web of Science, and Scopus. Three main concepts were searched: exergaming, neurodevelopmental disorders, and social behaviors. Keywords and subject headings were used for each concept. 3080 articles were identified in the initial search in 2019; in January 2021, 167 additional articles were identified. Of these, 8 studies with 242 children with autism spectrum disorder, cerebral palsy, or developmental coordination disorder were included in this review. Six studies reported that participation in AVG was associated with improved social functioning, social interaction, emotional well-being, and social/emotional skills in children with ASD, CP, and DCD. In contrast, two studies that included children diagnosed with ASD did not find any association between AVG participation and social behaviors. The findings of this systematic review suggest that participation in an AVG intervention may be associated with improved social behaviors in children and adolescents with ASD, CP, and DCD. However, due to the limited number of studies included, this finding must be interpreted with caution. Future research is needed that examines the treatment fidelity of AVG in improving social behavior skills in children with neurodevelopmental disorders and the generalizability of these skills to real-life social situations.
35236119|a|Rare genomic disorders (RGDs) confer elevated risk for neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders. In this era of intense genomics discoveries, the landscape of RGDs is rapidly evolving. However, there has not been comparable progress to date in scalable, harmonized phenotyping methods. As a result, beyond associations with categorical diagnoses, the effects on dimensional traits remain unclear for many RGDs. The nature and specificity of RGD effects on cognitive and behavioral traits is an area of intense investigation: RGDs are frequently associated with more than one psychiatric condition, and those studied to date affect, to varying degrees, a broad range of developmental and cognitive functions. Although many RGDs have large effects, phenotypic expression is typically influenced by additional genomic and environmental factors. There is emerging evidence that using polygenic risk scores in individuals with RGDs offers opportunities to refine prediction, thus allowing for the identification of those at greatest risk of psychiatric illness. However, translation into the clinic is hindered by roadblocks, which include limited genetic testing in clinical psychiatry, and the lack of guidelines for following individuals with RGDs, who are at high risk of developing psychiatric symptoms. The Genes to Mental Health Network (G2MH) is a newly funded National Institute of Mental Health initiative that will collect, share, and analyze large-scale data sets combining genomics and dimensional measures of psychopathology spanning diverse populations and geography. The authors present here the most recent understanding of the effects of RGDs on dimensional behavioral traits and risk for psychiatric conditions and discuss strategies that will be pursued within the G2MH network, as well as how expected results can be translated into clinical practice to improve patient outcomes.
35236116|a|
35236065|a|The continuous increase in the prevalence of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) in the population, the debatable nature of many aspects of etiology, pathogenesis, and treatment of these disorders justify the urgent need for the development of effective medical rehabilitation methods affecting the pathogenetic mechanisms.Exposure of children with ASD to external stimuli in excessive force often leads to the stress-systems response not corresponding to the compensation abilities of the body. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of iodine-bromine baths on stress-system indicators in children with ASD. MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study involved 74 children with ASD (F84) aged 3 to 14 years (mean age 6.23+-0.37 years) included in the main group (MG). The control group (CG) consisted of 25 healthy children.The examination included detailed history taking, examination by specialists, assessment of disease severity using CARS scale, evaluation of beta-endorphin, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and cortisol levels in blood serum by ELISA. Thirty-four (45.9%) children had a moderate autism level (total score 30-37), and 40 (54.1%) children had severe autism (total score 37-60). In the MG, there were 27 (36.5%) children with mild symptoms of hyperactivity (subgroup A) and 47 (63.5%) children with severe aggression, tantrums, and increased hyperactivity (subgroup B). All MG patients were assigned into two subgroups by randomization: Subgroup 1: 30 children with ASD received health resort treatment (HRT) without iodine-bromine baths (IB); Subgroup 2: 44 children with ASD received similar HRT and IB. RESULTS: Statistically significant increase of beta-endorphin, ACTH and cortisol levels (p<0.01, p<0.05, p<0.01, respectively) in children with ASD (compared to those in CG children) was identified. In children without hyperactivity, a moderate increase of these parameters was noted; significantly higher values were observed in children with severe hyperactivity, impulsiveness, and aggression (p<0.05, p<0.001, respectively). After treatment, there was a statistically significant increase in beta-endorphin level in subgroup 1 children who received HRT without IB, while in children of subgroups A and B (p<0.05, p<0.05, p<0.01, respectively), there was a decrease in ACTH level (p<0.05, p<0.01, p<0.001 respectively) and a trend towards a cortisol level decrease. Inclusion of IB in HRT course associated with a significant decrease of beta-endorphin level in children of subgroups A and B (p<0.001), a decrease of ACTH level (p<0.001) and cortisol (p<0.001, p<0.01, p<0.001, respectively), which resulted in vicious circle breaking and normalization of relations between stress-limiting and stress-releasing parts of pathogenesis. CONCLUSION: Most children with autism spectrum disorders showed significant increases in beta-endorphin, adrenocorticotropic hormone, and cortisol levels, indicating dysfunction between the stress-limiting and stress-releasing systems, as well as between the central and peripheral parts of the stress-releasing chain. The tonic effect of resort treatment was noted, limiting its use in children with autism spectrum disorders, increased hyperactivity, and aggression. The inclusion of iodine-bromine baths in resort treatment has a calming non-medicinal effect and can be recommended for use in children with symptoms of severe hyperactivity.
35236046|a|
35235788|a|Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are developmental neurotoxicants implicated as environmental risk factors for neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Here, we report the effects of prenatal exposure to a human-relevant mixture of PCBs on the DNA methylation profiles of mouse placenta and fetal brain. Thousands of differentially methylated regions (DMRs) distinguish placenta and fetal brain from PCB-exposed mice from sex-matched vehicle controls. In both placenta and fetal brain, PCB-associated DMRs are enriched for functions related to neurodevelopment and cellular signaling and enriched within regions of bivalent chromatin. The placenta and brain PCB DMRs overlap significantly and map to a shared subset of genes enriched for Wnt signaling, Slit/Robo signaling, and genes differentially expressed in NDD models. The consensus PCB DMRs also significantly overlap with DMRs from human NDD brain and placenta. These results demonstrate that PCB-exposed placenta contains a subset of DMRs that overlap fetal brain DMRs relevant to an NDD.
35235489|a|Calculation is one of the higher brain functions, which has been linked to the inferior parietal lobule and part of the frontal lobe. Cases of hypercalculia have been reported, usually in the setting of Autism-Spectrum Disorder or Savant syndrome. We report the case of a 27-year-old male undergraduate who had hypercalculia with normal clinical neurological findings. His brain MRI showed a nonspecific lesion in the right parietal lobe white matter. Further functional neuroimaging is suggested.
35235372|a|PURPOSE: According to the speech attunement framework, autistic individuals lack the ability and/or motivation to "tune up" their speech to the same level of precision as their neurotypical peers. However, previous studies exploring the articulatory patterns of autistic individuals have yielded disparate findings. One reason contrasting conclusions exist may be because studies have relied on perceptual measures of articulation. Here, we use an objective acoustic measure of articulatory precision to explore the articulatory patterns of autistic children and adults. METHOD: This was a retrospective analysis of an existing corpus of 900 recorded speech samples taken from 30 adult and 30 child participants across two different population groups: autistic individuals (autism spectrum disorder [ASD] group) and neurotypical individuals (neurotypical [NT] group). Articulatory precision scores were calculated using an automated metric that compares observed acoustics to the expected acoustics for each phoneme production. Linear mixed-effects models were used to compare the articulatory precision scores across population group (i.e., ASD group vs. NT group) and to see if these differences were moderated by age group (i.e., children vs. adult). RESULTS: The speech of autistic individuals was characterized by reduced articulatory precision relative to their neurotypical peers. This pattern was not significantly moderated by age, indicating it occurred in both the children and adult groups. CONCLUSIONS: Our preliminary findings indicate that imprecise articulation may be a characteristic of the speech of autistic individuals in both childhood and adulthood. These findings are in line with predictions posited by the speech attunement framework. Given the current lack of speech markers for this clinical population and the importance of speech quality in the social integration of autistic individuals, our results advance articulatory precision as a viable and important target for future research.
35235353|a|The involvement of genetic risk and the underlying developmental and neural circuit mechanisms in autism-related social deficit are largely unclear. Here, we report that deletion of AUTS2, a high-susceptibility gene of ASDs, caused postnatal dentate gyrus (DG) hypoplasia, which was closely relevant to social recognition deficit. Furthermore, a previously unknown mechanism for neural cell migration in postnatal DG development was identified, in which Auts2-related signaling played a vital role as the transcription repressor. Moreover, the supramammillary nucleus (SuM)-DG-CA3 neural circuit was found to be involved in social recognition and affected in Auts2-deleted mice due to DG hypoplasia. Correction of DG-CA3 synaptic transmission by using a pharmacological approach or chemo/optogenetic activation of the SuM-DG circuit restored the social recognition deficit in Auts2-deleted mice. Our findings demonstrated the vital role of Auts2 in postnatal DG development, and this role was critical for SuM-DG-CA3 neural circuit-mediated social recognition behavior.
35235129|a|This study investigates the effectiveness of a 6-month parent-mediated early intervention telehealth program for children with an autism spectrum disorder. The participants comprised a total of 27 parents. The findings showed that participation in the program promotes parents' empowerment and reduce parental stress and a general improvement in the parents' ability to stimulate children's learning. Moreover, the study reveals an effect of parents' age in mediating the relationship among the parents' ability, stress, and empowerment levels. These results suggest that an early intervention telehealth program may help parents become aware of how to benefit from interactions with their children, promote their empowerment, and reduce parenting stress.
35235102|a|INTRODUCTION: Automated hand-held pupillometry demonstrates precision accuracy, offering promise for augmenting ASD screening. METHODS: Monocular pupillometry was examined in children and adolescents (36 ASD; 24 TD). Multiple logistic regression and receiver operating characteristic analysis assessed PLR metrics and diagnostic status. RESULTS: Constriction time (Ct1) (ASD: M = 0.69, SD = 0.21; TD: M = 0.82, SD = 0.18; t(58 = 2.37; p = 0.02) and return to baseline (RTB T75) (ASD: M = 2.93, SD = 1.21; TD: M = 2.32, SD = 1.08; t(58) =  - 2.03; p = 0.04) predicted ASD (beta =  - 1.31, OR = 0.27; RTB T75, beta = 0.156, OR = 1.162). Sensitivity = 74.8%, when RTB >= 1.83 s and 69.4% when Ct1 = 0.785 s. CONCLUSION: Findings suggest monocular pupillometry captures differences detecting ASD.
35234355|a|COVID-related lockdown led to a radical modification of daily activities and routines which are known to affect sleep. Compared to the general population, participants with autism may be particularly vulnerable to the repercussions of lockdown on sleep, given their intrinsic inflexible adherence to routines and the high overall prevalence of sleep disturbances in this population. The study is a French nation-wide online survey assessing sleep-wake rhythms and behaviors known to affect sleep (daily screen time, daylight exposure, and physical activity), before and during COVID-related lockdown. Respondents were 207 adults with autism (56% female) and 1652 adults of the general population (77% female), with a mean age 35.3 years (SD 11.3). Before lockdown, the adults with autism displayed on average later bedtime and waking hours, lower sleep quality, more evening screen time, less exposure to daylight, and less exercise (all p < 0.01). Lockdown affected all studied measures of sleep and related exposures in a similar way in both groups: poorer self-rated sleep quality as well as a less regular and delayed sleep-wake rhythm, longer screen time in the evening and less exposure to daylight (all p < 0.001). Adults with autism displayed significantly higher levels of sleep and circadian rhythm disturbances and less favorable daily routines known to regulate sleep. While the effect of confinement on sleep and sleep related behaviors was similar in both groups, the results highlight that the pre-existing shift in circadian rhythms and lifestyles in adults with ASD further deteriorated during lockdown. LAY ABSTRACT: COVID-related lockdown led to a radical modification of daily activities and routines known to affect sleep. In a sample of 1800 adults, we observed that, before lockdown, participants with autism displayed significantly higher levels of sleep disturbances and less favorable daily routines known to regulate sleep, compared to the general population. While the deleterious effect of lockdown on sleep was similar in both groups, pre-existing difficulties in adults with autism reached worrying levels during lockdown.
35234089|a|PURPOSE: The aim is to understand what therapies and interventions families in a low and middle income (LMIC) country, such as Vietnam resort to in their attempts to seek care for their children with ASD and why they choose these therapies. METHODS: We undertook semi-structured qualitative interviews with 27 parents of children with autism and an online survey of 112 parents as part of a broader ethnographic study over one year augmented with recent interactional observations and a review of social media. RESULTS: There is limited access to formal interventions for families with children with ASD in Vietnam. Rather, families resort to syncretic care using an average of 6.8 different interventions per child. These included: speech therapy; physical therapy; prescribed medicines; and ABA as well as geomancy, special dietary regimes, biochemical testing, stem cell therapies and religious and cultural practices. Despite having low incomes, the families surveyed spent an average USD 345 per month on interventions, many of which are not evidence-based. Desire to care and potentially "cure" their children within a context of stigma associated with ASD drives parents to seek all possible interventions for their children. CONCLUSIONS: There remains a large gap in access to appropriate evidence-based interventions or trained therapists for families. Further information for parents, culturally appropriate guidelines for effective interventions, more trained rehabilitation professionals and regulation is required.IMPLICATIONS FOR REHABILITATIONWithin low and middle income countries (LMIC), such as Vietnam there is a lack of intervention services, difficulties in accessing appropriate specialists, poor quality care and the costs of care.Families seek a range of formal interventions and costly informal therapies as well as culturally specific practices to care for their child/ren and require information on effective therapies.In LMIC training programs to build capacity for allied health professionals need to be implemented on the latest evidence-based therapies.It is important to develop culturally appropriate Vietnamese guidelines to support interventions for children with ASD.
35233844|a|Obesity and related metabolic disorders are epidemic diseases. Promoting thermogenesis and a functional increase in the browning of white adipocytes may counteract obesity. On the other hand, the molecular mechanism that regulates brown and beige fat-mediated thermogenesis is unclear. This article reports a molecular network led by cytoplasmic FMR1-interacting protein 2 (CYFIP2) that negatively regulates adipocyte browning in white adipocytes. Although the function of CYFIP2 in Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) and autism have been reported, its physiological roles in adipocytes remain elusive. Therefore, this study examined the physiological consequences of its deprivation in cultured 3T3-L1 white adipocytes using loss-of-function studies. Combined real-time quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction and immunoblot analysis showed that the loss of CYFIP2 induces fat browning, as evidenced by the gene and protein expression levels of the brown fat-associated markers. A deficiency of CYFIP2 promoted mitochondrial biogenesis and significantly enhanced the expression of the core set beige fat-specific genes (Cd137, Cidea, Cited1, Tbx1, and Tmem26) and proteins (PGC-1alpha, PRDM16, and UCP1). In addition, a CYFIP2 deficiency promoted lipid catabolism and suppressed adipogenesis, lipogenesis, and autophagy. A mechanistic study showed that the loss of CYFIP2 induces browning in white adipocytes, independently via the activation of mTORC1 and suppression of the GABA-BR signaling pathway. The present data revealed a previously unidentified mechanism of CYFIP2 in the browning of white adipocytes and emphasized the potential of CYFIP2 as a pharmacotherapeutic target for treating obesity and other metabolic disorders.
35233033|a|Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have heterogeneous comorbid conditions. This study examined whether comorbid conditions in ASD are associated with polygenic risk scores (PRS) of ASD or PRS of comorbid conditions in non-ASD specific populations. Genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data were obtained from 1386 patients with ASD from the Autism Genetic Resource Exchange (AGRE) study. After excluding individuals with missing clinical information concerning comorbid conditions, a total of 707 patients were included in the study. A total of 18 subgroups of comorbid conditions ('topics') were identified using a machine learning algorithm, topic modeling. PRS for ASD were computed using a genome-wide association meta-analysis of 18,381 cases and 27,969 controls. From these 18 topics, Topic 6 (over-represented by allergies) (p = 1.72 x 10-3) and Topic 17 (over-represented by sensory processing issues such as low pain tolerance) (p = 0.037) were associated with PRS of ASD. The associations between these two topics and the multi-locus contributors to their corresponding comorbid conditions based on non-ASD specific populations were further explored. The results suggest that these two topics were not associated with the PRS of allergies and chronic pain disorder, respectively. Note that characteristics of the present AGRE sample and those samples used in the original GWAS for ASD, allergies, and chronic pain disorder, may differ due to significant clinical heterogeneity that exists in the ASD population. Additionally, the AGRE sample may be underpowered and therefore insensitive to weak PRS associations due to a relatively small sample size. Findings imply that susceptibility genes of ASD may contribute more to the occurrence of allergies and sensory processing issues in individuals with ASD, compared with the susceptibility genes for their corresponding phenotypes in non-ASD individuals. Since these comorbid conditions (i.e., allergies and pain sensory issues) may not be attributable to the corresponding comorbidity-specific biological factors in non-ASD individuals, clinical management for these comorbid conditions may still depend on treatments for core symptoms of ASD.
35232796|a|BACKGROUND: A neurodevelopmental syndrome was recently reported in four patients with SOX4 heterozygous missense variants in the high-mobility-group (HMG) DNA-binding domain. The present study aimed to consolidate clinical and genetic knowledge of this syndrome. METHODS: We newly identified 17 patients with SOX4 variants, predicted variant pathogenicity using in silico tests and in vitro functional assays and analysed the patients' phenotypes. RESULTS: All variants were novel, distinct and heterozygous. Seven HMG-domain missense and five stop-gain variants were classified as pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant (L/PV) as they precluded SOX4 transcriptional activity in vitro. Five HMG-domain and non-HMG-domain missense variants were classified as of uncertain significance (VUS) due to negative results from functional tests. When known, inheritance was de novo or from a mosaic unaffected or non-mosaic affected parent for patients with L/PV, and from a non-mosaic asymptomatic or affected parent for patients with VUS. All patients had neurodevelopmental, neurological and dysmorphic features, and at least one cardiovascular, ophthalmological, musculoskeletal or other somatic anomaly. Patients with L/PV were overall more affected than patients with VUS. They resembled patients with other neurodevelopmental diseases, including the SOX11-related and Coffin-Siris (CSS) syndromes, but lacked the most specific features of CSS. CONCLUSION: These findings consolidate evidence of a fairly non-specific neurodevelopmental syndrome due to SOX4 haploinsufficiency in neurogenesis and multiple other developmental processes.
35232533|a|Purpose: The purpose of this study was to compare video modelling (VM) to a Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS) aimed at improving the oral hygiene of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Methods: This prospectively stratified randomized controlled trial was conducted on 50 children with mild and moderate ASD. Children were assigned into two balanced groups. The control group was educated through PECS, and the intervention group was exposed to VM. Oral hygiene was assessed using the Oral Hygiene Index-simplified (OHI-s) on four occasions (at baseline and at three, six, and 12 months). Quantitative data were analyzed using Fisher's exact test and a t-test at a five percent significance level and 95 percent confidence interval (95% CI), respectively. Spearman's rank correlation coefficient (r) was used to correlate baseline characteristics in both groups to obtain average OHI-s scores. Results: The VM group showed a statistically significant reduction in average OHI-s scores compared to the PECS group over the follow-up period (P<0.001). At three, six, and 12 months, the OHI-s mean differences were 0.30 (95% CI equals 0.14 to 0.47), 0.58 (95% CI equals 0.39 to 0.77), and 0.57 (95% CI equals 0.30 to 0.84), respectively. For both groups, the severity of ASD was moderately associated with OHI-s scores at 12 months. Conclusion: Video modelling showed superior results in improving the oral hygiene of children with autism spectrum disorder compared to the Picture Exchange Communication System.
35232265|a|Backgrounds and Aims: The Northern Ireland Youth Wellbeing Survey (NIYWS) was commissioned by the Health and Social Care Board (NI) with the aim of providing reliable prevalence estimates of the mental health problems of children and young people aged 2-19 years. Method: The NIYWS used a random probability design, stratified by deprivation decile and county, to ensure even geographical distribution and representation. The survey used a broad range of validated measures to identify children and young people who met established clinical criteria for common mood, anxiety and behaviour disorders, trauma related disorders, as well as those at risk of autism spectrum disorder, eating disorders, future psychotic illness, self-injury or suicide. Results: Data were collected on 3074 children and young people aged 2-19 years, as well as over 2800 parents. The survey achieved a high response rate (67%) and initial findings indicated that 11% of the sample were at risk of emotional or behavioural problems. Conclusions: The NIYWS was the first large scale nationally representative survey of the mental health of children and young people in NI. Despite the legacy of political violence the initial findings show comparable levels of emotional and behavioural problems to England.
35231721|a|BACKGROUND/AIMS: The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need for accessible support for children with developmental disabilities. This study explored online literacy instruction with supplementary parent-led shared book reading (SBR) for children with autism. METHODS: Twenty-one children with autism (5-12 years) completed a battery of assessments (T1) before being assigned to ability matched Instruction (n = 10) and Control groups (n = 11). Instruction group participants completed 16 h of ABRACADABRA instruction working with a researcher 1:1 online and SBR activities at home with a parent over 8 weeks. All participants were reassessed after the instruction period (T2) and parents of children in the Instruction group were interviewed regarding their views and experiences. RESULTS: Quantitative analyses showed no significant improvements in reading for Instruction group children relative to Control group children. However, each child successfully participated in 16 online instruction sessions and qualitative data revealed that parents were generally positive about the program, with some observing improvements in their child's literacy skills and reading confidence. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: While it appears children with autism can participate in online literacy instruction, sixteen hours of online ABRACADABRA instruction with parent-led SBR may not be effective in improving their reading skills. Further research is required to explore whether more intensive and/or extended online instruction may be feasible and effective, and to improve uptake of parent-led book reading activities at home.
35231638|a|CHD8 is a candidate gene for autism spectrum disorders and neurological development delay. It has been reported to be essential for neurogenesis in the cerebral cortex, but the function of CHD8 in cerebellum has not been comprehensively investigated. The potential relationship of cerebellum dysplasia with psychiatric disorders in patients with CHD8 mutations is still not clear. In this study, we establish different conditional knockout mouse models to investigate the roles of CHD8 in cerebellar development. Mice with neural stem cell-specific Chd8 deletion exhibited significant reduction of cerebellum volume and no layering structure is detected. Genetic deletion of Chd8 in cerebellar granule neuron progenitors (GNPs) lead to cerebellar hypoplasia, absent of proliferation layer and ectopic of Purkinje neuron. However, no substantial cerebellar dysplasia is detected in mice with Purkinje neuron- or oligodendrocyte-specific Chd8 ablation. Single-cell RNA sequencing indicates that ribosome-related genes and pathways are most significantly disrupted in GNPs, indicating the potential mechanism. Importantly, in addition to ataxia phenotype, mice with GNP-specific Chd8 ablation present a neuropsychiatric phenotype in three-chamber and light/dark tests. Taken together, our results provide insights not only into the function of CHD8 in cerebellar development, but also the pathogenesis of neuropsychiatric disorders in patients with CHD8 mutations.
35231419|a|Chronic subconvulsive activity in early life leads to sex-related autistic-like deficits in handling, object recognition, and social performance in pre-pubertal rats. Since autism and epilepsy are common neurodevelopmental disorders with high coincidence, we tested whether early-life chronic subconvulsive activity compared to convulsive activity alters handling, spatial memory, lateralization, coping strategy and the seizure threshold in a sex-dependent manner. A hypothesis is that convulsive seizures may alter sex differences induced by subconvulsive (SC) activity. Serial subconvulsive doses of kainic acid (KA) were administered postnatally (0.25-1 mg/kg) for 15 days to induce the chronic subconvulsive phenotype (SC group). Age-matched controls and a subset of SC pups were exposed to a convulsive dose of KA (KA and SC + KA groups; 7.5 mg/kg) or flurothyl vapors. In our open handling test, controls and the ASD groups escaped to a similar degree whereas after convulsive seizures, the pups exhibited freezing behavior; no escapes occurred. In the spontaneous alternating T-Maze control males and females entered the left arm with higher frequency. The SC males but not SC females entered left and right arms to a similar degree; alternation rates were reduced to chance revealing a sex difference. However, in KA and SC + KA groups, there was a sharp loss of spontaneous alternation rates. The rapid repetitive entries shifted to the right in both sexes possibly be due to hippocampal injury and changes in network activity induced by status epilepticus. In the forced swim test (FST), control and CS females were more active than corresponding males. After convulsions, immobility was reduced and vertical mobility was increased in SC and SC + KA males suggesting an elevated coping strategy compared to females. Onset and severity of KA induced status epilepticus was delayed in SC males and females possibly due to desensitization of KA receptors. Following flurothyl exposure, control males had faster onset of twitches and clonic seizures than control females which disappeared after the sub-convulsive pre-treatment. Data suggest that behavioral manifestations are more readily detectable between males and females when low levels of hyperexcitation are present chronically in early postnatal development but diminished after tonic-clonic convulsions persist. Therefore, therapeutic interventions may benefit patients if initiated upon the initial onset of sex-related autistic pathologies, particularly in males, which may reduce subsequent vulnerability to seizures.
35230960|a|The majority of people with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) exhibit difficulties in social communication and behavior, which hinder their learning capability, amid others. Among technological solutions for people with ASD, serious games are frequently used to enhance learning of specific skills and instructional contents. However, because of heterogeneity in applications and game design, few studies have investigated their use in training daily activities. This paper presents a 3D personalized serious game we developed and validated to help ASD patients practice with shopping activities. Personalized training is paramount in people with ASD, thus several elements of this game were personalized to improve engagement and therefore the effectiveness of the virtual training. In order to assess the validity of the game, ten subjects (age 11.9 2.7, 20% female) with ASD played ten sessions of the serious game, once per week. The participants underwent a real-life experience pre- and post-training in a real-life supermarket. Changes in daily living skills among participants were evaluated through specific tools: a form based on the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health for Children and Youth; and the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale II. Significant improvements (p<0.05) were detected in the main skills trained with the serious game, especially in learning the shopping procedure, directing attention, and problem-solving skills. These findings suggest that personalized serious games can represent a prominent tool to enhance daily living skills, but future work should clinically validate their efficacy.
35230878|a|PURPOSE: Sentence diversity is a measure of early language development that has yet to be applied to individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The primary aim of this study was to identify whether children with ASD show change in sentence diversity over 6 months of treatment with Naturalistic Developmental Behavioral Intervention (NDBI). The secondary aim was to examine possible predictors of changes in children's sentence diversity, including caregiver use of NDBI strategies, naturally occurring instances of caregiver Toy Talk, and child characteristics. METHOD: Fifty children with ASD (ages 2-4 years) and their caregivers, who were receiving NDBI, engaged in two 10-min video-recorded play interactions, 6 months apart. Child speech was transcribed and coded for sentence diversity. Caregiver input was transcribed and coded for naturally occurring Toy Talk. Zero-inflated negative binomial mixed models were used to explore predictors of change in child sentence diversity. RESULTS: Children's sentence diversity improved over time. Changes in caregiver NDBI strategy use and caregiver baseline Toy Talk were significant predictors of changes in sentence diversity, as were baseline age, nonverbal ratio IQ, and child sex. Additionally, a significant interaction of caregiver baseline Toy Talk and change in caregiver NDBI strategies emerged; the effect of caregiver baseline Toy Talk on children's sentence diversity change was stronger when NDBI strategy use improved. CONCLUSIONS: Sentence diversity is a developmentally sensitive measure of language development in ASD. NDBI strategies that facilitate reciprocal social communication, combined with input composed of declarative sentences with noun or third-person pronoun subjects, may provide optimal support for children's sentence development.
35230861|a|Co-occurring anxiety in children on the autism spectrum is associated with greater social challenges, including poorer social skills and relationships, which may influence the severity and presentation of anxiety symptoms, particularly social anxiety. The current study used Bayesian network analytics (Williams & Mulder, 2020) and a multimethod approach to examine (a) how different facets of social functioning relate to one another and to anxiety severity and comorbidity, (b) which facet(s) are most influential and thus may represent optimal targets for intervention, and (c) how social functioning relates to the presentation of social fears in a large treatment-seeking sample of autistic children with anxiety disorders (n = 191, 7-13 years). Results indicated strong associations among measures of social ability (i.e., theory of mind [ToM], social motivation, friendship attainment) and among measures of social integration (i.e., bullying, interpersonal and peer difficulties), with only bullying demonstrating a significant association with anxiety. ToM was the most interconnected variable in the network, and social motivation demonstrated the strongest individual connections with other variables, particularly with other facets of social ability. Socially anxious children with impaired ToM were less likely to express fears of negative evaluation, resulting in a distinct diagnostic presentation of social fears. Findings suggest that social motivation and ToM may represent important targets for intervention for autistic children with co-occurring anxiety. Further, social-cognitive difficulties associated with autism, like ToM, may play a role in distinct manifestations of anxiety in these youth. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2022 APA, all rights reserved).
35230405|a|
35230240|a|Axons of the corpus callosum (CC) mediate the interhemispheric communication required for complex perception in mammals. In the somatosensory (SS) cortex, the CC exchanges inputs processed by the primary (S1) and secondary (S2) areas, which receive tactile and pain stimuli. During early postnatal life, a multistep process involving axonal navigation, growth, and refinement, leads to precise CC connectivity. This process is often affected in neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism and epilepsy. We herein show that in mice, expression of the axonal signaling receptor Neuropilin 1 (Nrp1) in SS layer (L) 2/3 is temporary and follows patterns that determine CC connectivity. At postnatal day 4, Nrp1 expression is absent in the SS cortex while abundant in the motor area, creating a sharp border. During the following 3 weeks, Nrp1 is transiently upregulated in subpopulations of SS L2/3 neurons, earlier and more abundantly in S2 than in S1. In vivo knock-down and overexpression experiments demonstrate that transient expression of Nrp1 does not affect the initial development of callosal projections in S1 but is required for subsequent S2 innervation. Moreover, knocking-down Nrp1 reduces the number of S2L2/3 callosal neurons due to excessive postnatal refinement. Thus, an exquisite temporal and spatial regulation of Nrp1 expression determines SS interhemispheric maps.
35229745|a|Background & objectives: Prevalence of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has been reportedly on the rise in western literature. However, accurate data from India are not available. The present study was planned to assess the community-based prevalence of ASD in Chandigarh, India. Methods: This study was a two-stage survey of representative child population of Chandigarh using stratified random sampling technique, covering 8820 children between the ages 1.5 and 10 yr. Proportionate population from urban (82.3%), rural (4.3%) and slum area (13.4%) were included in the study and screened using Chandigarh autism screening instrument (CASI). Thirty two children scored above cut-off, of whom two had shifted to other places before they could be assessed and 30 were assessed in detail. Detailed assessment was done using Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised and Childhood Autism Rating Scale-2; diagnosis was made according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-5. Nineteen were diagnosed with ASD. Results: Of the 8451 children screened between the age group of one and a half to 10yr, 19 (10 boys and 9 girls) were diagnosed as ASD, thus the prevalence of ASD was found to be 2.25 per 1000 (0.69-5.19, 95% confidence interval) children in Chandigarh. No child below the cut-off on the screening instrument was diagnosed as ASD. Interpretation & conclusions: The results suggest that the Prevalence of ASD in India is lower than western countries.
35229117|a|This Ethics Rounds considers the benefits and burdens of a potentially temporary tracheostomy in an adolescent with autism and severe tactile defensiveness.
35228983|a|Meta-analyses consistently find a substantial possible association between neonatal jaundice (hyperbilirubinemia) and later autism risk. The obvious question this poses is "what is the source of this risk?" This review explores the complementary roles of jaundice severity and time, racial and geographic disparities, and early infant feeding regime change, and discusses potential implications of these findings. A range of factors appears to increase the risk of autism development following neonatal jaundice, all of which are associated with the "exclusive breastfeeding" paradigm. Severity presents an intuitive risk factor in the context of bilirubin neurotoxicity; jaundice from the modal root cause of insufficient milk intake progresses as that condition persists. Racial and geographic disparities present another intuitive set of risk factors, including a heightened risk of missed diagnosis for darker-skinned neonates and delayed care access in poorer settings. In addition to these intuitive factors, near- or full-term as opposed to preterm status and phototherapy treatment may also heighten risk. These counter-intuitive findings provide additional support for deprivation/starvation as a crucial antecedent or independent variable, and time as a mediator to progression in and subsequent risk from jaundice; heightened medical monitoring and supplementation seem to protect preterms, and phototherapy risks iatrogenesis, having replaced without sufficient safety evidence the prior standard treatment of switching jaundiced, breastfed babies to formula. Critically, jaundice associated with insufficient milk intake due to breastfeeding insufficiencies is fully preventable and trivially treatable with appropriate supplemental milk. Feeding neonates adequately may play an important role in preventing autism and other neurodevelopmental disorders including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, hearing impairment, learning disorders, and mood disorders. Precautionary principle invocation is overdue.
35228979|a|Joubert syndrome is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder that was first described in 1969. It can present with neonatal respiratory distress, ocular motility abnormalities, developmental delays, and other congenital cerebellar malformations. It is also connected to autism, hydrocephalus, and duodenal atresia. The incidence and severity of the disease are variable according to different presentations. We report a case of a female infant that was born to nonconsanguineous marriage and diagnosed at the age of four months with Joubert syndrome. The patient presented with global developmental delay and abnormal bilateral eye movements. Upon further investigation, brain magnetic resonance imaging showed a molar tooth sign, which is a characteristic finding and one of the diagnostic criteria of Joubert syndrome. A multidisciplinary team approach with ophthalmology, pediatrics, and physiotherapy departments was used, and the patient showed good progress in ocular, neurological and mental development. In conclusion, Joubert syndrome can be diagnosed early with the help of magnetic imaging and a multidisciplinary approach is necessary to provide good quality of life to these patients.
35228676|a|Many mental health conditions present a spectrum of social difficulties that overlaps with social behaviour in the general population including shared but little characterised genetic links. Here, we systematically investigate heterogeneity in shared genetic liabilities with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism spectrum disorders (ASD), bipolar disorder (BP), major depression (MD) and schizophrenia across a spectrum of different social symptoms. Longitudinally assessed low-prosociality and peer-problem scores in two UK population-based cohorts (4-17 years; parent- and teacher-reports; Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children(ALSPAC): N <= 6,174; Twins Early Development Study(TEDS): N <= 7,112) were regressed on polygenic risk scores for disorder, as informed by genome-wide summary statistics from large consortia, using negative binomial regression models. Across ALSPAC and TEDS, we replicated univariate polygenic associations between social behaviour and risk for ADHD, MD and schizophrenia. Modelling variation in univariate genetic effects jointly using random-effect meta-regression revealed evidence for polygenic links between social behaviour and ADHD, ASD, MD, and schizophrenia risk, but not BP. Differences in age, reporter and social trait captured 45-88% in univariate effect variation. Cross-disorder adjusted analyses demonstrated that age-related heterogeneity in univariate effects is shared across mental health conditions, while reporter- and social trait-specific heterogeneity captures disorder-specific profiles. In particular, ADHD, MD, and ASD polygenic risk were more strongly linked to peer problems than low prosociality, while schizophrenia was associated with low prosociality only. The identified association profiles suggest differences in the social genetic architecture across mental disorders when investigating polygenic overlap with population-based social symptoms spanning 13 years of child and adolescent development.
35228613|a|Data science advances in behavioral signal processing and machine learning hold the promise to automatically quantify clinically meaningful behaviors that can be applied to a large amount of data. The objective of this study was to identify an automated behavioral marker of treatment response in social communication in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). First, using an automated computational method, we successfully derived the amount of time it took for a child with ASD and an adult social partner (N pairs = 210) to respond to each other while they were engaged in conversation bits ("latency") using recordings of brief, natural social interactions. Then, we measured changes in latency at pre- and post-interventions. Children with ASD who were receiving interventions showed significantly larger reduction in latency compared to those who were not receiving interventions. There was also a significant group difference in the changes in latency for adult social partners. Results suggest that the automated measure of latency derived from natural social interactions is a scalable and objective method to quantify treatment response in children with ASD.
35227832|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder, characterized by impaired social communication, abnormal repetitive behaviors and restricted interests and/or sensory behaviors. It has been widely accepted that ASD involves a complex interplay of both genetic and environmental risk factors. Existing medications are only symptomatic treatments, there are no effective treatments that can improve these core social behavior deficits. Recent studies indicated that synaptic development and abnormal myelination are linked to the pathogenesis of ASD. The stable tubule only polypeptide (STOP) protein, also known as microtubule-associated protein 6, plays an important role in neuronal development and synaptic plasticity. Our previous studies showed that STOP protein was significantly reduced in the plasma of autistic subjects and in the cortex of BTBR T+ Itpr3tf (BTBR) mouse model of ASD. Furthermore, studies have shown that Epothilone D, a taxol-like microtubule-stabilizing agent, could alleviate behavioral and synaptic deficits in STOP-null mice. Here, we further evaluate whether Epothilone D treatment is sufficient to modulate the autism-like behaviors in the BTBR mice, and explore the underlying mechanism. BTBR mice were treated either with Epothilone D dissolved in 99% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or with 99% DMSO vehicle. Our studies demonstrated that the restrictive repetitive behaviors of BTBR mice were improved after Epothilone D treatment, which could be achieved by improving microtubule stability and further regulating the expression of excitatory synapse-related and myelin-related proteins. These results indicate that microtubule stability may be a new and promising therapeutic target for treating patients with ASD.
35227762|a|BACKGROUND: In inpatient psychiatric units, seclusion (isolation in a locked room) is recommended only as a last resort for serious aggression or agitation. In response to an increase in seclusion during 2015, an 8-bed child and adolescent inpatient unit implemented a suite of multidisciplinary interventions. This study examines changes in seclusion rates following intervention implementation and assesses whether specific patient factors were associated with seclusion rates before and after interventions. METHOD: Multi-modal interventions, comprised of patient treatment plans, intake and handover meetings, staff supervision and debriefing sessions, were implemented from January 2016. We compared quarterly seclusion rates (episodes per 1000 patient days) across a thirteen-year period, from July 2008 to June 2021. Change in seclusion rates following intervention was evaluated using a segmented regression analysis. We examined whether patient factors were associated with seclusion rates, and whether the duration of seclusion episodes differed before and after interventions. RESULTS: There was a 100% reduction in seclusion rates in the 6 months following intervention implementation, from 28.4 episodes per 1000 patient days in July-September 2015, to 4.7 episodes in January-March 2016, reaching 0.0 episodes by April-June 2016. This reduction was maintained until April-June 2021. Most patients with seclusion events before and after intervention implementation had a neurodevelopmental disorder diagnosis and a minority of patients accounted for most seclusion events. There was a 65% reduction in the average duration of seclusion episodes following interventions, however this was not statistically significant. LIMITATIONS: Due to a crisis in staff morale, interventions were implemented simultaneously, preventing an understanding of whether a single intervention accounted for change. While not addressed in the current study, assessing perceptions of staff, children and parents following intervention implementation may have elucidated barriers and facilitators to change. CONCLUSIONS: Multidisciplinary, patient-centered interventions may be effective for long-term reduction of seclusion rates in inpatient psychiatric units. These findings highlight patient factors associated with seclusion reduction which should be considered when implementing interventions.
35227462|a|BACKGROUND: Altered resting-state functional connectivity in the default mode network (DMN) is characteristic of both autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Standard analytical pipelines for resting-state functional connectivity focus on linear correlations in activation time courses between neural networks or regions of interest. These features may be insensitive to temporally lagged or nonlinear relationships. METHODS: In a twin cohort study comprising 292 children, including 52 with a diagnosis of ASD and 70 with a diagnosis of ADHD, we applied nonlinear analytical methods to characterize periodic dynamics in the DMN. Using recurrence quantification analysis and related methods, we measured the prevalence, duration, and complexity of periodic processes within and between DMN regions of interest. We constructed generalized estimating equations to compare these features between neurotypical children and children with ASD and/or ADHD while controlling for familial relationships, and we leveraged machine learning algorithms to construct models predictive of ASD or ADHD diagnosis. RESULTS: In within-pair analyses of twins with discordant ASD diagnoses, we found that DMN signal dynamics were significantly different in dizygotic twins but not in monozygotic twins. Considering our full sample, we found that these patterns allowed a robust predictive classification of both ASD (81.0% accuracy; area under the curve = 0.85) and ADHD (82% accuracy; area under the curve = 0.87) cases. CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that synchronized periodicity among regions comprising the DMN relates both to neurotypical function and to ASD and/or ADHD, and they suggest generally that a dynamical analysis of network interconnectivity may be a useful methodology for future neuroimaging studies.
35227461|a|BACKGROUND: The discovery of coding variants in genes that confer risk of intellectual disability (ID) is an important step toward understanding the pathophysiology of this common developmental disability. METHODS: Homozygosity mapping, whole-exome sequencing, and cosegregation analyses were used to identify gene variants responsible for syndromic ID with autistic features in two independent consanguineous families from the Arabian Peninsula. For in vivo functional studies of the implicated gene's function in cognition, Drosophila melanogaster and mice with targeted interference of the orthologous gene were used. Behavioral, electrophysiological, and structural magnetic resonance imaging analyses were conducted for phenotypic testing. RESULTS: Homozygous premature termination codons in PDZD8, encoding an endoplasmic reticulum-anchored lipid transfer protein, showed cosegregation with syndromic ID in both families. Drosophila melanogaster with knockdown of the PDZD8 ortholog exhibited impaired long-term courtship-based memory. Mice homozygous for a premature termination codon in Pdzd8 exhibited brain structural, hippocampal spatial memory, and synaptic plasticity deficits. CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate the involvement of homozygous loss-of-function mutations in PDZD8 in a neurodevelopmental cognitive disorder. Model organisms with manipulation of the orthologous gene replicate aspects of the human phenotype and suggest plausible pathophysiological mechanisms centered on disrupted brain development and synaptic function. These findings are thus consistent with accruing evidence that synaptic defects are a common denominator of ID and other neurodevelopmental conditions.
35226550|a|PURPOSE: The aim of this review is to illuminate the connection between inferential skills and spoken language idiom comprehension (SLIC) with a focus on autism. Idioms are frequently occurring figurative expressions, such as feeling blue, on cloud nine, and all tied up, that have literal and nonliteral meanings. METHOD: In this review article, an overview of SLIC is provided, highlighting the importance of inferential skills and other pertinent factors and theories contributing to idiom acquisition in autistic children. The search criteria used included peer-reviewed journal articles from 1982 to 2021 to synthesize both seminal and current research on this topic. Though some articles selected for this review did not focus on idioms in spoken language, they were deemed necessary for analyzing various aspects impacting idiom development and comprehension. RESULTS: Research shows that figurative language differences are a hallmark feature of autism, causing idioms to be interpreted literally. Occurring in everyday spoken and written language, idiom comprehension is essential for adequate communication in daily interactions. Poor inferential abilities directly impact SLIC and have negative implications on social and academic outcomes. Several factors contributing to SLIC have been highlighted in the literature, including transparency (semantic analyzability), familiarity, and context. CONCLUSIONS: The comparable skills underpinning inferential comprehension and SLIC raise the argument that SLIC is incumbent upon intact inferential abilities. As such, autistic children will benefit from utilizing inference from context to deduce idiomatic meanings. Future directions for research and recommendations for improving SLIC in clinical practice are offered.
35226062|a|IMPORTANCE: Ayres Sensory Integration  is an evidence-based practice that requires a comprehensive assessment before intervention. The Evaluation in Ayres Sensory Integration (EASI) is intended for this purpose, and psychometric data are needed to determine its validity and reliability. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the internal consistency of four EASI Praxis tests and their validity as developmental measures. DESIGN: Cross-sectional developmental design. SETTING: Participants' homes. PARTICIPANTS: Typically developing children and young adolescents, ages 6 to 12 yr (N = 234). Outcomes and Measures: We analyzed four EASI Praxis tests using Cronbach's alpha, Pearson correlation coefficients, and one-way analysis of variance to explore internal consistency and developmental trends. RESULTS: The findings indicate moderate to high internal consistency for all tests. Significant correlations between age and praxis scores indicate that the EASI Praxis tests are sensitive to developmental changes. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Occupational therapists can have confidence in the internal consistency and sensitivity to developmental changes of these praxis scores through early adolescence. What This Article Adds: Occupational therapists administering EASI Praxis tests can have confidence that they consistently measure praxis ability and are sensitive to developmental changes across ages 6 to 12 yr. The results suggest that praxis continues to develop into early adolescence, and adolescents may benefit from assessment and intervention targeting praxis ability.
35225680|a|Background: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of pervasive neurodevelopmental disorders with a strong hereditary component. Although, genome-wide linkage scans (GWLS) and association studies (GWAS) have previously identified hundreds of ASD risk gene loci, the results remain inconclusive. Method: We performed a heterogeneity-based genome search meta-analysis (HEGESMA) of 15 genome scans of autism and ASD. Results: For strictly defined autism, data were analyzed across six separate genome scans. Region 7q22-q34 reached statistical significance in both weighted and unweighted analyses, with evidence of significantly low between-scan heterogeneity. For ASDs (data from 12 separate scans), chromosomal regions 5p15.33-5p15.1 and 15q22.32-15q26.1 reached significance in both weighted and unweighted analyses but did not reach significance for either low or high heterogeneity. Region 1q23.2-1q31.1 was significant in unweighted analyses with low between-scan heterogeneity. Finally, region 8p21.1-8q13.2 reached significant linkage peak in all our meta-analyses. When we combined all available genome scans (15), the same results were produced. Conclusions: This meta-analysis suggests that these regions should be further investigated for autism susceptibility genes, with the caveat that autism spectrum disorders have different linkage signals across genome scans, possibly because of the high genetic heterogeneity of the disease.
35223572|a|Background: Autism significantly affects mental health and lowers subjective well-being (SWB). The rehabilitation therapy of autism is attracting widespread attention. We aimed to explore the effects of image-sandplay therapy on the mental health and SWB of children with autism. Methods: A total of 90 children with autism treated in Changchun Women and Children Health Hospital from Jan 2019 to Jun 2020 were enrolled by convenient sampling method. They were randomly divided into control (n=45) and observation (n=45) groups. The observation group had a 12-week image-sandplay therapy based on conventional rehabilitation therapy. In the image-sandplay therapy, the one-to-one intervention was provided once a week, 60 min in each. Autism treatment evaluation checklist (ATEC), autism behavior checklist (ABC), Conners parent symptom questionnaire (PSQ), satisfaction with life scale (SWLS), and positive and negative affect scale for children (PANAS-C) of the two groups were assessed. Results: After intervention, the observation group showed lower scores in ATEC scale and ABC scale than the control group, and the difference show statistical significance (P<0.05). Meanwhile, the observation group showed significantly lower scores in PSQ scale than the control group, showing a significant difference (P<0.05). The observation group shows higher scores in SWLS scale and positive affect scores than the control group, as well as significantly lower negative affected scores than the control groups, showing a significant difference (P<0.05). Conclusion: Image-sandplay therapy can improve the symptoms of children with autism and is conducive to promoting mental health and increasing SWB. It is a feasible and effective rehabilitation method.
35223296|a|INTRODUCTION: A substantial proportion of college students experience challenges transitioning from pediatrics to the adult healthcare system. Combined internal medicine and pediatrics (Med-Peds) providers are frequently tasked with facilitating this transition and promoting the health and well-being of this population. There is an increasing proportion of college students with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in the U.S. This population experiences particularly pronounced challenges navigating the healthcare system and, as a result, often contends with fragmented healthcare. These issues are due to a range of factors, including lack of physician training, education, and resources, as well as a dearth of available research that can inform Med-Peds providers' efforts to support college students with ADHD. METHODS: The current study compared a nationally representative sample of U.S. college freshmen with ADHD to those without ADHD on health, academic, and non-academic capacities. This study analyzed population-weighted data from the Cooperative Institutional Research Program's Freshman Survey. RESULTS: Students with ADHD were more likely to report co-occurring conditions and feelings of depression and overwhelm. They were less likely to report emotional health that was above average or in the highest 10th percentile. Although they reported lower overall academic aspirations, they were more likely to rate themselves in the highest 10th percentile on a range of non-academic capacities. CONCLUSION: The results from this study can inform efforts among Med-Peds providers seeking to promote the health and well-being of college students with ADHD.
35222739|a|The biological mechanisms linking diet-related obesity and autistic behaviors remain unclear. Metformin has proven to be beneficial in the treatment of many syndromes, including autism spectrum disorder. Therefore, the aim of this study was to assess whether metformin treatment could ameliorate metabolic and behavioral alterations in C57BL/6 mice kept on a high-fat diet (HFD), and whether these changes were related to modifications in the gut microbiota and 5-HT levels. As expected, ten weeks of HFD ingestion increased body weight, adiposity, and glucose levels. HFD-fed mice showed a marked aggravation of repetitive behaviors (marble burying and self-grooming), and this was prevented by metformin administration. In addition, HFD-fed mice increased the total distance travelled in the open field test. This hyperactivity was counteracted by metformin cotreatment. In the elevated plus maze test, HFD-fed mice showed a reduced number of entries into the open arms. Interestingly, both HFD and metformin cotreatment increased social interactions in the three-chamber test. HFD increased the levels of intestinal tryptophan and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid. Metformin stimulated gut tryptophan and promoted the synthesis of 5-HT in the HFD group. Lactococcus, Trichococcus, Romboutsia, and Faecalibaculum were enriched in HFD-fed mice, whereas the HFD group cotreated with metformin was enriched in Intestinimonas and L. reuteri. Faecalibacterium was positively correlated with sociability and 5-HT pathway components in mice that received metformin. In summary, HFD consumption elicited a complex phenotype comprising higher levels of anxiety-like and repetitive behaviors but also increased sociability. Metformin could potentially improve HFD-induced disorders in the autistic spectrum through a mechanism involving positive modulation of 5-HT levels in the gut and its microbiota composition.
35222660|a|Objectives: Fragile X syndrome (FXS) has been known as the most common cause of inherited intellectual disability and autism. This disease results from the loss of fragile X mental retardation protein expression due to the expansion of CGG repeats located on the 5' untranslated region of the fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene. Materials & Methods: In the present study, the peripheral blood-mesenchymal stem cells (PB-MSCs) of two female full mutation carriers were differentiated into neuronal cells by the suppression of bone morphogenesis pathway signaling. Then, the expression of genes adjacent to CGG repeats expansion, including SLIT and NTRK-like protein 2 (SLITRK2), SLIT and NTRK-like protein 4 (SLITRK4), methyl CpG binding protein 2 (MECP2), and gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor subunit alpha-3 (GABRA3), were evaluated in these cells using SYBR Green real-time polymerase chain reaction. Results: The obtained results indicated that the expression of SLITRK2 and SLITRK4 were upregulated and downregulated in the neuron-like cells differentiated from the PB-MSCs of females with FMR1 full mutation, compared to that of the normal females, respectively. Furthermore, the expression of MECP2 and GABRA3 genes were observed to be related to the phenotypic differences observed in the female FMR1 full mutation carriers. Conclusion: The observed association of expression of genes located upstream of the FMR1 gene with phenotypic differences in the female carriers could increase the understanding of novel therapeutic targets for patients with mild symptoms of FXS and the patients affected by other FMR1-related disorders.
35222653|a|This review presented the current literature on coping mechanisms among parents of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), focusing on types of coping mechanisms among parents and different coping mechanisms between mothers and fathers of children with ASD. A search of published literature in English was conducted using Google Scholar, PsycINFO, Medline, Scopus, CINAHL, EBSCO, Springer, Ovid, PubMed, and Cochrane Library up to February 2020. Overall, 18 articles were relevant to the review. The review included thirteen studies for types of coping mechanisms among parents of children with ASD and five studies for different coping mechanisms between mothers and fathers. Coping mechanisms demonstrated by parents when caring for their child include problem-focused and emotion-focused coping. A comparison between fathers and mothers in our review showed that mothers used emotion-focused coping more than fathers, while fathers used problem-focused coping more frequently than mothers. The review provides an exciting opportunity to advance our knowledge on types of coping mechanisms and gender difference in using coping mechanisms among parents of children with ASD. The review also sheds new light on developing supportive interventions by healthcare providers to improve coping mechanisms among parents of children with ASD.
35222122|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) affects reciprocal social interaction and produces abnormal repetitive, restrictive behaviors and interests. The diverse causes of ASD are divided into genetic alterations and environmental risks. The prevalence of ASD has been rising for several decades, which might be related to environmental risks as it is difficult to consider that the prevalence of genetic disorders related to ASD would increase suddenly. The latter includes (1) exposure to medications, such as valproic acid (VPA) and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) (2), maternal complications during pregnancy, including infection and hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, and (3) high parental age. Epidemiological studies have indicated a pathogenetic role of prenatal exposure to VPA and maternal inflammation in the development of ASD. VPA is considered to exert its deleterious effects on the fetal brain through several distinct mechanisms, such as alterations of gamma-aminobutyric acid signaling, the inhibition of histone deacetylase, the disruption of folic acid metabolism, and the activation of mammalian target of rapamycin. Maternal inflammation that is caused by different stimuli converges on a higher load of proinflammatory cytokines in the fetal brain. Rodent models of maternal exposure to SSRIs generate ASD-like behavior in offspring, but clinical correlations with these preclinical findings are inconclusive. Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and advanced parental age increase the risk of ASD in humans, but the mechanisms have been poorly investigated in animal models. Evidence of the mechanisms by which environmental factors are related to ASD is discussed, which may contribute to the development of preventive and therapeutic interventions for ASD.
35221938|a|Sound localization requires rapid interpretation of signal speed, intensity, and frequency. Precise neurotransmission of auditory signals relies on specialized auditory brainstem synapses including the calyx of Held, the large encapsulating input to principal neurons in the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body (MNTB). During development, synapses in the MNTB are established, eliminated, and strengthened, thereby forming an excitatory/inhibitory (E/I) synapse profile. However, in neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD), E/I neurotransmission is altered, and auditory phenotypes emerge anatomically, molecularly, and functionally. Here we review factors required for normal synapse development in this auditory brainstem pathway and discuss how it is affected by mutations in ASD-linked genes.
35221892|a|Functional connectivity network (FCN) calculated by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) plays an increasingly important role in the exploration of neurologic and mental diseases. Among the presented researches, the method of constructing FCN based on Matrix Variate Normal Distribution (MVND) theory provides a novel perspective, which can capture both low- and high-order correlations simultaneously with a clear mathematical interpretability. However, when fitting MVND model, the dimension of the parameters (i.e., population mean and population covariance) to be estimated is too high, but the number of samples is relatively quite small, which is insufficient to achieve accurate fitting. To address the issue, we divide the brain network into several sub-networks, and then the MVND based FCN construction algorithm is implemented in each sub-network, thus the spatial dimension of MVND is reduced and more accurate estimates of low- and high-order FCNs is obtained. Furthermore, for making up the functional connectivity which is lost because of the sub-network division, the rs-fMRI mean series of all sub-networks are calculated, and the low- and high-order FCN across sub-networks are estimated with the MVND based FCN construction method. In order to prove the superiority and effectiveness of this method, we design and conduct classification experiments on ASD patients and normal controls. The experimental results show that the classification accuracy of "hierarchical sub-network method" is greatly improved, and the sub-network found most related to ASD in our experiment is consistent with other related medical researches.
35221765|a|In defecation training, parent-mediated intervention via teleconsultation is helpful because the number of instructions for establishing defecation habits is limited. In the case report of the present study, defecation training was conducted based on gradual target setting and differential reinforcement through teleconsultation via email for a Caucasian 5-year-old boy with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) who lived in Greece. As a result of the intervention, namely the gradual target setting and differential reinforcement, in-bowl defecations increased at home.
35221709|a|Background: DNA methylation (DNAm) is one of the main epigenetic mechanisms that affects gene expression without changing the underlying DNA sequence. Aberrant DNAm has an implication in different human diseases such as cancer, schizophrenia, and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). ASD is a neurodevelopmental disorder that affects behavior, learning, and communication skills. Acyl-CoA synthetase family member 3 (ACSF3) encodes malonyl-CoA synthetase that is involved in the synthesis and oxidation of fatty acids. The dysregulation in such gene has been reported in combined malonic and methylmalonic aciduria associated with neurological symptoms such as memory problems, psychiatric diseases, and/or cognitive decline. This research aims to study DNAm in the transcription factor (TF) binding site of ACSF3 in Saudi autistic children. To determine whether the DNAm of the TF-binding site is a cause or a consequence of transcription regulation of ACSF3. Methods: RT-qPCR and DNA methylight qPCR were used to determine the expression and DNAm level in the promoter region of ACSF3, respectively. DNA and RNA were extracted from 19 cases of ASD children and 18 control samples from their healthy siblings. Results: The results showed a significant correlation between the gene expression of ACSF3 and specificity protein 1 (SP1) in 17 samples of ASD patients, where both genes were upregulated in 9 samples and downregulated in 8 samples. Conclusion: Although this study found no DNAm in the binding site of SP1 within the ACSF3 promoter, the indicated correlation highlights a possible role of ACSF3 and SP1 in ASD patients.
35220596|a|Epidemiological studies have shown that maternal diabetes is associated with autism spectrum disorder development, although the detailed mechanism remains unclear. We have previously found that maternal diabetes induces persistent epigenetic changes and gene suppression in neurons, subsequently triggering autism-like behavior (ALB). In this study, we investigated the potential role and effect of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) on maternal diabetes-mediated gastrointestinal (GI) dysfunction and ALB in a mouse model. We show in vitro that transient hyperglycemia induced persistent epigenetic changes and gene suppression of tight junction proteins. In vivo, maternal diabetes-mediated oxidative stress induced gene suppression and inflammation in both peripheral blood mononuclear cells and intestine epithelial cells, subsequently triggering GI dysfunction with increased intestinal permeability and altered microbiota compositions, as well as suppressed gene expression in neurons and subsequent ALB in offspring; HSC transplantation (HSCT) ameliorates this effect by systematically reversing maternal diabetes-mediated oxidative stress. We conclude that HSCT can ameliorate maternal diabetes-mediated GI symptoms and autism-like behavior in mouse offspring.
35220523|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are strikingly more prevalent in males, but the molecular mechanisms responsible for ASD sex-differential risk are poorly understood. Abnormally shorter telomeres have been associated with autism. Examination of relative telomere lengths (RTL) among non-syndromic male (N = 14) and female (N = 10) children with autism revealed that only autistic male children had significantly shorter RTL than typically-developing controls (N = 24) and paired siblings (N = 10). While average RTL of autistic girls did not differ significantly from controls, it was substantially longer than autistic boys. Our findings indicate a sexually-dimorphic pattern of RTL in childhood autism and could have important implications for RTL as a potential biomarker and the role/s of telomeres in the molecular mechanisms responsible for ASD sex-biased prevalence and etiology.
35220405|a|Several large-scale whole-exome sequencing studies in patients with schizophrenia (SCZ) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have identified rare variants with modest or strong effect size as genetic risk factors. Dysregulation of cellular calcium homeostasis might be involved in SCZ/ASD pathogenesis, and genes encoding L-type voltage-gated calcium channel (VGCC) subunits Cav1.1 (CACNA1S), Cav1.2 (CACNA1C), Cav1.3 (CACNA1D), and T-type VGCC subunit Cav3.3 (CACNA1I) recently were identified as risk loci for psychiatric disorders. We performed a screening study, using the Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM), of exon regions of these four candidate genes (CACNA1C, CACNA1D, CACNA1S, CACNA1I) in 370 Japanese patients with SCZ and 192 with ASD. Variant filtering was applied to identify biologically relevant mutations that were not registered in the dbSNP database or that have a minor allele frequency of less than 1% in East-Asian samples from databases; and are potentially disruptive, including nonsense, frameshift, canonical splicing site single nucleotide variants (SNVs), and non-synonymous SNVs predicted as damaging by five different in silico analyses. Each of these filtered mutations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. If parental samples were available, segregation analysis was employed for measuring the inheritance pattern. Using our filter, we discovered one nonsense SNV (p.C1451* in CACNA1D), one de novo SNV (p.A36V in CACNA1C), one rare short deletion (p.E1675del in CACNA1D), and 14 NSstrict SNVs (non-synonymous SNV predicted as damaging by all of five in silico analyses). Neither p.A36V in CACNA1C nor p.C1451* in CACNA1D were found in 1871 SCZ cases, 380 ASD cases, or 1916 healthy controls in the independent sample set, suggesting that these SNVs might be ultra-rare SNVs in the Japanese population. The neuronal splicing isoform of Cav1.2 with the p.A36V mutation, discovered in the present study, showed reduced Ca2+-dependent inhibition, resulting in excessive Ca2+ entry through the mutant channel. These results suggested that this de novo SNV in CACNA1C might predispose to SCZ by affecting Ca2+ homeostasis. Thus, our analysis successfully identified several ultra-rare and potentially disruptive gene variants, lending partial support to the hypothesis that VGCC-encoding genes may contribute to the risk of SCZ/ASD.
35220360|a|
35220205|a|An altered pattern of information processing has been hypothesized in autism spectrum disorder (ASD), characterized by enhanced local network connectivity and reduced long-distance communication. Previous findings of impaired white matter integrity in the genu and the body of the corpus callosum already indicated reduced long-distance connectivity in patients with ASD. However, it remained unclear how this reduced white matter integrity affects the structural connectivity of the corresponding brain areas. To this end, we analyzed magnetic resonance images (MRI) from 30 participants with high-functioning ASD and 30 typically developed individuals using a global tracking approach to estimate the fiber count and volume of the transcallosal fiber tracts of the five corpus callosum subsections. A reduced fiber count and fiber volume in the anterior subsection of the corpus callosum was detected, supporting the hypothesis of reduced long-distance connectivity in ASD.
35219981|a|
35219402|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) involves genetic and environmental components. The underlying circuit mechanisms are unclear, but behaviorally, aversion toward unfamiliarity, a hallmark of autism, might be involved. Here, we show that in Shank3DeltaC/DeltaC ASD model mice, exposure to novel environments lacking familiar features produces long-lasting failure to engage and repetitive behaviors upon re-exposure. Inclusion of familiar features at first context exposure prevented enhanced dopamine transients in tail of striatum (TS) and restored context-specific control of engagement to wild-type levels in Shank3DeltaC/DeltaC mice. Engagement upon context re-exposure depended on the activity in prelimbic cortex (PreL)-to-TS projection neurons in wild-type mice and was restored in Shank3DeltaC/DeltaC mice by the chemogenetic activation of PreL TS projection neurons. Environmental enrichment prevented ASD-like phenotypes by obviating the dependence on PreL TS activity. Therefore, novel context experience has a key role in triggering ASD-like phenotypes in genetically predisposed mice, and behavioral therapies involving familiarity and enrichment might prevent the emergence of ASD phenotypes.
35219158|a|This paper proposes that tVNS has the potential to be a new treatment for some of the behaviour difficulties that may affect people with intellectual disabilities and/or autism, particularly those people born with specific neurodevelopmental syndromes. Behaviours, such as emotional outbursts, physical aggression, and self-injury are a relative common occurrence in these groups and have a significant impact on wellbeing and quality of life for the individuals and their families. Such behaviours have generally been understood through the lens of learning theory, the likelihood of their occurrence being shaped and reinforced by the responses of others. However, when vagus nerve stimulation has been used to treat epilepsy improvements in cognition, behaviour, and general wellbeing have been noted suggesting that with these behaviours other causal mechanisms are also important. More recently incidental findings from a proof of concept study where vagus nerve stimulation was given, using an implanted device, to people with the genetically determined neurodevelopmental disorder, Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS), findings of benefit supported the above view. A second study, this time using tVNS, reported a similar result. In this paper we review the evidence for the use of tVNS for behavioural problems, consider the challenges when conducting trials in this population, and reflect on what the preliminary observations in people with PWS tell us about the possible mechanisms that underpin such behaviours.
35218886|a|Previous studies have demonstrated patients with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are accompanied by alterations of spontaneous brain activity in gray matter. However, whether the alterations of spontaneous brain activity exist in white matter remains largely unclear. In this study, 88 ASD patients and 87 typical controls (TCs) were included and regional homogeneity (ReHo) was calculated to characterize spontaneous brain activity in white matter. Voxel-wise two-sample t-tests were performed to investigate ReHo alterations, and cluster-level analyses were conducted to examine structural-functional coupling changes. Compared with TCs, the ASD group showed significantly decreased ReHo in the left superior corona radiata and left posterior limb of internal capsule, and decreased ReHo in the left anterior corona radiata with a trend level of significance. In addition, significantly weaker structural-functional coupling was observed in the left superior corona radiata and left posterior limb of internal capsule in ASD patients. Taken together, these findings highlighted abnormalities of white matter's regional spontaneous brain activity in ASD, which may provide new insights into the pathophysiological mechanisms of this disorder.
35218239|a|AIM: To conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis on the prevalence of tooth grinding and/or clenching (TGC) in children and adolescents with a neurodevelopmental disorder or other developmental condition. METHODS: A search was performed in seven databases, two sources of grey literature and reference lists of included studies. Risk of bias was assessed using the Joanna Briggs Institute Critical Appraisal Checklist for Studies Reporting Prevalence Data. We used random-effects models with Freeman-Tukey double arcsine transformation for the meta-analyses. RESULTS: After selection, 77 of the 2240 studies met inclusion criteria and were categorised by disability and type of TGC (reported, clinically observed and definitive). The pooled prevalence of reported TGC in individuals with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder was 57.6% (95% CI [confidence interval]: 49.5-65.6), 50.4% (95% CI: 35.5-65.4) in individuals with autism spectrum disorder, 67% (95% CI: 59.2-74.8) in cerebral palsy and 68.2% (95% CI: 59.8-76.6) in Down syndrome. Pooled prevalence of clinically observed TGC was 57.5% (95% CI: 31.6-83.4) in autism spectrum disorder and 71.9% (95% CI: 52.4-91.4) in cerebral palsy. Individuals with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder presented 39.8% (95% CI: 24-55.6) of definitive TGC. CONCLUSION: Prevalence of reported, clinically observed, and definitive TGC varies according to disabilities, although due to high heterogeneity the result should be interpreted with caution. Variations exist mainly due to sampling bias and the use of non-validated methods to assess TGC. CRD42020212640.
35218093|a|OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to examine the relationship between the variables of mental, physical, and emotional problems in children with developmental disabilities (DDs) and the spousal support perceived by the mothers of those children. METHODS: One hundred forty-three children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD, n:43), intellectual disability (ID, n:28), cerebral palsy (CP, n:47), or Down syndrome (DS, n:25) were included in this study. The support that mothers received from their spouses was evaluated using the Spousal Support Scale (SSS). Aggressive behavior in the children was evaluated using the anger-aggression subscale of the Social Competence and Behavior Evaluation Scale (SCBE-30). The data obtained were then subjected to statistical comparisons. RESULTS: Multiple comparisons revealed no significant difference between the DD diagnosis groups (ID, CP, ASD, and DS) in terms of spousal support or spousal support sub-dimension scores (p > 0.05). Significant negative correlation was found between anger-aggression subscale scores and SSS sub-parameters (emotional support r = -0.315 p < 0.001, financial and informational support r = -0.285 p < 0.001, appreciation r = -0.299 p < 0.001, social support r = -0.381 p < 0.001, and spouse support score r = -0.389 p < 0.001). CONCLUSION: Children's anger-aggression levels were adversely affected by a lack of spousal support for their mothers.
35217944|a|Limited guidance is available for families of youth with ASD (YASD) to prepare for invasive medical procedures. This study examined caregiver perspectives regarding YASD's gastrointestinal endoscopy (GE) experience to improve the endoscopy experience for YASD. Thirty-four caregivers of YASD, (M = 9.85 years, SD = 4.6) who underwent GE at Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego between May 2018 and July 2019 (identified via electronic health record) participated in a structured phone interview. Caregivers reported a positive experience due to the procedural team's responsiveness to the needs of YASD and appropriately answering/addressing questions/concerns. Caregivers reported a need for ASD-specific information on how to prepare for GE. Specific recommendations are discussed. Study findings offer strategies to improve the care experience of YASD undergoing GE.
35217801|a|Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified thousands of risk loci for psychiatric and substance use phenotypes, however the biological consequences of these loci remain largely unknown. We performed a transcriptome-wide association study of 10 psychiatric disorders and 6 substance use phenotypes (GWAS sample size range, N = 9725-807,553) using expression quantitative trait loci data from 532 prefrontal cortex samples. We estimated the correlation of genetically regulated expression between phenotype pairs, and compared the results with the genetic correlations. We identified 393 genes with at least one significant phenotype association, comprising 458 significant associations across 16 phenotypes. Overall, the transcriptomic correlations for phenotype pairs were significantly higher than the respective genetic correlations. For example, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorder, both childhood developmental disorders, had significantly higher transcriptomic correlation (r = 0.84) than genetic correlation (r = 0.35). Finally, we tested the enrichment of phenotype-associated genes in gene co-expression networks built from human prefrontal cortex samples. Phenotype-associated genes were enriched in multiple gene co-expression modules and the implicated modules contained genes involved in mRNA splicing and glutamatergic receptors, among others. Together, our results highlight the utility of gene expression data in the understanding of functional gene mechanisms underlying psychiatric disorders and substance use phenotypes.
35217568|a|OBJECTIVE: To assess the effectiveness of non-pharmacological interventions for the treatment of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in children. DESIGN: Overview of systematic reviews (SRs). PARTICIPANTS: Children aged 12 years and under with ASD. SEARCH METHODS: In October 2021, we searched Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, MEDLINE, Embase, PsycINFO and Epistemonikos placing no restrictions on language or date of publication. INTERVENTIONS: 17 non-pharmacological interventions compared with placebo, no-treatment (including waiting list) or other interventions (ie, usual care, as defined by the authors of each study). DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We rated the methodological quality of the included SRs using A Measurement Tool to Assess Systematic Reviews (AMSTAR 2). We reported the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) certainty of the evidence (CoE) according to the analysis conducted by the authors of the included SRs. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: A multidisciplinary group of experts agreed on analysing nine critical outcomes evolving core and non-core ASD symptoms. PUBLIC AND PATIENT INVOLVEMENT STATEMENT: Organisations of parents of children with ASD participated in external revision of the final version of the report. RESULTS: We identified 52 reports that were within our scope, of which 48 were excluded for various reasons. After excluding less reliable SRs, we included four SRs. Non-pharmacological interventions (ie, Early Intensive Behavioural Intervention, Applied Behaviour Analysis, Picture Exchange Communication System and Naturalistic Developmental Behavioural Interventions) may have favourable effects on some core outcomes including language, social and functioning, play or daily living skills in children with ASD (with either no GRADE assessment, very low or low CoE). In addition, we identified a lack of report for other key outcomes in the included SRs (ie, restricted, repetitive behaviour; play and sensory processing). CONCLUSIONS: Synthesised evidence regarding the efficacy of non-pharmacological interventions for children with ASD is scarce. High-quality SRs addressing the variety of both non-pharmacological interventions and relevant outcomes are needed. PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42020206535.
35217107|a|There is mixed evidence on the link between autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and diabetes. We conducted the first systematic review/meta-analysis on their association. Based on a pre-registered protocol (PROSPERO: CRD42021261114), we searched Pubmed, Ovid, and Web of Science databases up to 6 December 2021, with no language/type of document restrictions. We assessed study quality using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS). We included 24 studies (total: 3427,773 individuals; 237,529 with ASD and 92,832 with diabetes) in the systematic review and 20 in the meta-analysis (mean stars number on the NOS: 5.89/10). There was a significant association, albeit characterized by significant heterogeneity, when pooling unadjusted OR (1.535, 95% CI = 1.109-2.126), which remained significant when restricting the analysis to children and type 2 diabetes, but became non-significant when considering adjusted ORs (OR: 1.528, 95% CI = 0.954-2.448). No significant prospective association was found (n = 2) on diabetes predicting ASD (HR: 1.232, 0.826-11.837). Therefore, the association between ASD and diabetes is likely confounded by demographic and clinical factors that should be systematically investigated in future studies.
35216408|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are complex conditions that stem from a combination of genetic, epigenetic and environmental influences during early pre- and postnatal childhood. The review focuses on the cerebellum and the striatum, two structures involved in motor, sensory, cognitive and social functions altered in ASD. We summarize clinical and fundamental studies highlighting the importance of these two structures in ASD. We further discuss the relation between cellular and molecular alterations with the observed behavior at the social, cognitive, motor and gait levels. Functional correlates regarding neuronal activity are also detailed wherever possible, and sexual dimorphism is explored pointing to the need to apprehend ASD in both sexes, as findings can be dramatically different at both quantitative and qualitative levels. The review focuses also on a set of three recent papers from our laboratory where we explored motor and gait function in various genetic and environmental ASD animal models. We report that motor and gait behaviors can constitute an early and quantitative window to the disease, as they often correlate with the severity of social impairments and loss of cerebellar Purkinje cells. The review ends with suggestions as to the main obstacles that need to be surpassed before an appropriate management of the disease can be proposed.
35216372|a|Branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) are essential amino acids playing crucial roles in protein synthesis and brain neurotransmission. Branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDH), the flux-generating step of BCAA catabolism, is tightly regulated by reversible phosphorylation of its E1alpha-subunit. BCKDK is the kinase responsible for the phosphorylation-mediated inactivation of BCKDH. In three siblings with severe developmental delays, microcephaly, autism spectrum disorder and epileptic encephalopathy, we identified a new homozygous in-frame deletion (c.999_1001delCAC; p.Thr334del) of BCKDK. Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of BCAA were markedly reduced. Hyperactivity of BCKDH and over-consumption of BCAA were demonstrated by functional tests in cells transfected with the mutant BCKDK. Treatment with pharmacological doses of BCAA allowed the restoring of BCAA concentrations and greatly improved seizure control. Behavioral and developmental skills of the patients improved to a lesser extent. Importantly, a retrospective review of the newborn screening results allowed the identification of a strong decrease in BCAA concentrations on dried blood spots, suggesting that BCKDK is a new treatable metabolic disorder probably amenable to newborn screening programs.
35216055|a|Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by the full mutation as well as highly localized methylation of the fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene on the long arm of the X chromosome. Children with FXS are commonly co-diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder, attention and learning problems, anxiety, aggressive behavior and sleep disorder, and early interventions have improved many behavior symptoms associated with FXS. In this review, we performed a literature search of original and review articles data of clinical trials and book chapters using MEDLINE (1990-2021) and ClinicalTrials.gov. While we have reviewed the biological importance of the fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP), the FXS phenotype, and current diagnosis techniques, the emphasis of this review is on clinical interventions. Early non-pharmacological interventions in combination with pharmacotherapy and targeted treatments aiming to reverse dysregulated brain pathways are the mainstream of treatment in FXS. Overall, early diagnosis and interventions are fundamental to achieve optimal clinical outcomes in FXS.
35215455|a|The outcomes of supplementation with L-carnosine have been investigated in clinical trials in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, reports on the effects of L-carnosine in humans have been inconsistent, and the efficacy of L-carnosine supplementation for improving ASD symptoms has yet to be investigated in animal studies. Here, we examined the effects of oral supplementation with L-carnosine on social deficits in CD157KO mice, a murine model of ASD. Social deficits in CD157KO mice were assessed using a three-chamber social approach test. Oral supplementation with L-carnosine attenuated social behavioral deficits. The number of c-Fos-positive oxytocin neurons in the supraoptic nucleus and paraventricular nucleus was increased with L-carnosine supplementation in CD157KO mice after the three-chamber social approach test. We observed an increase in the number of c-Fos-positive neurons in the basolateral amygdala, a brain region involved in social behavior. Although the expression of oxytocin and oxytocin receptors in the hypothalamus was not altered by L-carnosine supplementation, the concentration of oxytocin in cerebrospinal fluid was increased in CD157KO mice by L-carnosine supplementation. These results suggest that L-carnosine supplementation restores social recognition impairments by augmenting the level of released oxytocin. Thus, we could imply the possibility of a safe nutritional intervention for at least some types of ASD in the human population.
35215304|a|In this review, we discuss the functions and main effects on pregnancy outcomes of three agents that have the ability to induce epigenetic modifications: valproic acid (VPA), a well-known teratogen that is a histone deacetylase inhibitor; S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe), the most effective methyl donor; and choline, an important micronutrient involved in the one methyl group cycle and in the synthesis of SAMe. Our aim was to describe the possible effects of these compounds when administered during pregnancy on the developing embryo and fetus or, if administered postnatally, their effects on the developing child. These substances are able to modify gene expression and possibly alleviate neurobehavioral changes in disturbances that have epigenetic origins, such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD), depression, Rett syndrome, and fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD). Valproic acid and SAMe are antagonistic epigenetic modulators whether administered in utero or postnatally. However, VPA is a major human teratogen and, whenever possible, should not be used by pregnant women. Most currently relevant data come from experimental animal studies that aimed to explore the possibility of using these substances as epigenetic modifiers and possible therapeutic agents. In experimental animals, each of these substances was able to alleviate the severity of several well-known diseases by inducing changes in the expression of affected genes or by other yet unknown mechanisms. We believe that additional studies are needed to further explore the possibility of using these substances, and similar compounds, for the treatment of "epigenetic human diseases".
35215274|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are a group of heterogeneous neurodevelopmental conditions characterized by social deficits, repetitive stereotyped behaviors, and altered inflammatory responses. Accordingly, children with ASD show decreased plasma levels of lipoxin A4 (LXA4), a mediator involved in the resolution of inflammation, which is the endogenous ligand of the formyl peptide receptor 2 (FPR2). To investigate the role of FPR2 in ASDs, we have used a new ureidopropanamide derivative able to activate the receptor, named MR-39. The effects of MR-39 (10 mg/kg, for 8 days) on hippocampal pro-inflammatory profile, neuronal plasticity, and social behavior were evaluated in two validated animal models of ASD: BTBR mouse strain and mice prenatally exposed to valproic acid (VPA). Primary cultures of hippocampal neurons from BTBR mice were also used to evaluate the effect of MR-39 on neurite elongation. Our results show that MR-39 treatment reduced several inflammatory markers, restored the low expression of LXA4, and modulated FPR2 expression in hippocampal tissues of both ASD animal models. These findings were accompanied by a significant positive effect of MR-39 on social behavioral tests of ASD mice. Finally, MR-39 stimulates neurite elongation in isolated hippocampal neurons of BTBR mice. In conclusion, these data indicate FPR2 as a potential target for an innovative therapeutical approach for the cure of ASD.
35215271|a|Autism is a complex disease with genetic predisposition factors. Real factors for treatment and early diagnosis are yet to be defined. This study integrated transcriptome and exome genotyping for identifying functional variants associated with autism spectrum disorder and their impact on gene expression to find significant variations. More than 1800 patients were screened, and 70 (47 male/23 female) with an average age of 7.56 +- 3.68 years fulfilled the DSM-5 criteria for autism. Analysis revealed 682 SNPs of 589 genes significantly (p < 0.001) associated with autism among the putative functional exonic variants (n = 243,345) studied. Olfactory receptor genes on chromosome 6 were significant after Bonferroni correction (alpha = 0.05/243345 = 2.05 x 10-7) with a high degree of linkage disequilibrium on 6p22.1 (p = 6.71 x 10-9). The differentially expressed gene analysis of autistic patients compared to controls in whole RNA sequencing identified significantly upregulated (foldchange >=0.8 and p-value <= 0.05; n = 125) and downregulated (foldchange <=-0.8 and p-value <= 0.05; n = 117) genes. The integration of significantly up- and downregulated genes and genes of significant SNPs identified regulatory variants (rs6657480, rs3130780, and rs1940475) associated with the up- (ITGB3BP) and downregulation (DDR1 and MMP8) of genes in autism spectrum disorder in people of Arab ancestries. The significant variants could be a biomarker of interest for identifying early autism among Arabs and helping to characterize the genes involved in the susceptibility mechanisms for autistic subjects.
35215136|a|Pathogens comprised of viruses, bacteria, gut microbiome, and parasites are a leading cause of ever-emerging diseases in humans. Studying pathogens for their ability to cause diseases is a topic of critical discussion among scientists and pharmaceutical centers for effective drug development that diagnose, treat, and prevent infection-associated disorders. Pathogens impact health either directly by invading the host or by eliciting an acute inflammatory immune response. This paradigm of inflammatory immune responses is even more consequential in people who may be immunocompromised. In this regard, pregnancy offers an altered immunity scenario, which may allow the onset of severe diseases. Viruses, such as Influenza, HIV, and now SARS-CoV-2, associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, raise new concerns for maternal and fetal/neonatal health. Intrauterine bacterial and parasitic infections are also known to impact pregnancy outcomes and neonatal health. More importantly, viral and bacterial infections during pregnancy have been identified as a common contributor to fetal brain development defects. Infection-mediated inflammatory uterine immune milieu is thought to be the main trigger for causing poor fetal brain development, resulting in long-term cognitive impairments. The concept of in utero programming of childhood and adult disorders has revolutionized the field of neurodevelopment and its associated complications. Recent findings in mice and humans clearly support the idea that uterine immunity during pregnancy controls the health trajectory of the child and considerably influences the cognitive function and mental health. In this review, we focus on the in utero programming of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and assess the effects of pathogens on the onset of ASD-like symptoms.
35213900|a|Non-invasive brain stimulation has been increasingly recognized for its potential as an investigational, diagnostic and therapeutic tool across the clinical neurosciences. Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is a non-invasive method of focal neuromodulation. Diagnostically, TMS can be used to probe cortical excitability and plasticity, as well as for functional mapping. Therapeutically, depending on the pattern employed, TMS can either facilitate or inhibit stimulated cortex potentially modulating maladaptive physiology through its effects on neuroplasticity. Despite this potential, applications of TMS in neurology have only been approved for diagnostic clinical neurophysiology, pre-surgical mapping of motor and language cortex, and the treatment of migraines. In this article, we discuss the principles of TMS and its clinical applications in neurology, including experimental applications in stroke rehabilitation, seizures, autism spectrum disorder, neurodegenerative disorders, movement disorders, tinnitus, chronic pain and functional neurological disorder. To promote increased cross-talk across neurology and psychiatry, we also succinctly review the TMS literature for the treatment of major depression and obsessive compulsive disorder. Overall, we argue that larger clinical trials that are better informed by circuit-level biomarkers and pathophysiological models will lead to an expansion of the application of TMS for patients cared for by neurologists.
35212867|a|This is a retrospective case series of pediatric patients referred to the psychogenic nonepileptic events clinic (PNEE) who had comorbid diagnoses of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) or intellectual disability (ID). We describe 15 patients, nine with ASD and six with ID who had a telephone visit follow-up at 12 months. There were higher rates of male gender (40%) and comorbid epilepsy (53%) compared to the larger PNEE cohort. Eleven patients were available for follow-up and ten patients had improvement in events or were event-free. We report that patients with ASD or ID can develop PNEE and experience improvement from events.
35212866|a|The study examined timing of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) identification in education versus health settings for 8-year-old children with ASD identified through records-based surveillance. The study also examined type of ASD symptoms noted within special education evaluations. Results indicated that children with records from only education sources had a median time to identification of ASD over a year later than children with records from health sources. Black children were more likely than White children to have records from only education sources. Restricted and repetitive behaviors were less frequently documented in educational evaluations resulting in developmental delay eligibility compared to specific ASD eligibility among children with ASD. Future research could explore strategies reduce age of identification in educational settings and increase equitable access to health evaluations.
35212461|a|Although the limbic system is closely related to emotion and social behaviors, little is known about the integrity of limbic pathways and how genetics influence the anatomical abnormalities of limbic networks in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Therefore, we used an ASD twin study design to evaluate the microstructural integrity and autism-related differences in limbic pathways of young children with ASD and to estimate the heritability of limbic tracts microstructure variance. We obtained diffusion tensor imaging scans from 33 pairs of twins with ASD aged 2-9 years and 20 age-matched typically developing children. The ACE model was used to estimate the relative effects of additive genetic factors (A), shared environmental factors (C) and specific environmental factors (E) on the variability of diffusivity measurements. We found a significant decrease in fractional anisotropy (FA) in the bilateral fornix and uncinate fasciculus (UF), as well as increased mean diffusivity (MD) and radial diffusivity (RD) in the bilateral fornix and right UF of ASD children. Correlation analysis showed that FA, MD, and lateralization indices of UF were correlated with autism diagnostic observation schedule scores. The ACE model revealed that genetic effects may drive some of the variability of microstructure in the bilateral fornix, cingulum, and left UF. In conclusion, in children with ASD, there are abnormalities in the white matter microstructure of the limbic system, which is related to the core symptoms; these abnormalities may be related to the relative contribution of genetic and environmental effects on specific tracts. LAY SUMMARY: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) children have abnormal white matter structure in limbic system related to ASD symptoms, and genetic factors play an important role in the development of limbic tracts.
35212373|a|The male preponderance in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) led to the hypothesis that aspects of female biology are protective against ASD. Females with ASD (ASD-F) report more compensatory behaviors (i.e. "camouflaging") to overcome ASD-related social differences, which may be a mechanism of protection. No studies have examined sex-related brain pathways supporting camouflaging in ASD-F, despite its potential to inform mechanisms underlying the ASD sex bias. We used functional connectivity (FC) to investigate "sex-atypical" and "sex-typical" FC patterns linked to camouflaging in adults with ASD and examined multimodal coherence of findings via structural connectometry. Exploratory associations with cognitive/emotional functioning examined the adaptive nature of FC patterns. We found (i) "sex-atypical" FC patterns linked to camouflaging in the hypothalamus and precuneus and (ii) "sex-typical" patterns in the right anterior cingulate and anterior parahippocampus. Higher hypothalamic FC with a limbic reward cluster also correlated with better cognitive control/emotion recognition. Structural connectometry validated FC results with consistent brain pathways/effect patterns implicated in ASD-F. In summary, "male-typical" and "female-typical" brain connectivity patterns support camouflaging in ASD-F in circuits implicated in reward, emotion, and memory retrieval. "Sex-atypical" results are consistent with fetal steroidogenic/neuroinflammatory hypotheses. However, female genetics/biology may contribute to "female-typical" patterns implicated in camouflaging.
35212358|a|The cerebral cortex presents with alterations in the number of specific cell types in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Astrocytes have many functions in the brain including a role in higher cognitive functions and in inflammatory brain processes. Therefore, an alteration in number, function, and/or activation state of astrocytes, could be present in ASD. We quantified astrocyte number in the gray and white matter of the prefrontal cortex-BA9, BA46, and BA47-in 15 ASD and 15 age- and sex-matched control cases. We labeled astrocytes with antibodies against the protein GFAP and S100beta, markers of astrocytes. We found a significant decrease in the number of astrocytes in the gray and white matter of all prefrontal areas of interest with both markers. We also found an increased state of activation of GFAP+ astrocytes in all areas. A reduced number of astrocytes in the cerebral cortex in ASD could lead to impaired synaptic function and disrupted connectivity. An increased astrocyte activation may indicate a chronic mild inflammatory state of the cerebral cortex in ASD. Overall, we found that astrocytes are disrupted in ASD.
35211746|a|OBJECTIVES: Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have difficulty participating in dental care and experience significant unmet dental needs. We examined the efficacy of parent training (PT) for improving oral hygiene and oral health in underserved children with ASD. METHODS: Families of Medicaid-eligible children with ASD (ages 3 to 13; 85% male, 62% with intellectual disability) reporting difficulty with dental care participated in a 6-month randomized controlled trial comparing PT (n = 60) to a psychoeducational Toolkit (n = 59). Primary outcomes were parent-reported frequency of twice-daily tooth brushing and dentist-rated visual plaque. Secondary outcomes included parent-reported child behavior problems during home oral hygiene and dentist-rated caries. Dentists were blind to intervention assignment. Analyses were intent-to-treat. RESULTS: Retention was high at post-treatment (3 months; 93%) and at 6-month follow-up (90%). Compared to the Toolkit, PT increased twice-daily tooth brushing at 3 months (78% PT vs. 55% Toolkit, P<.001) and 6 months (78% PT vs. 62% Toolkit, P=.002), and reduced plaque at 3 months (-0.19, 95% CI, -0.36 to -0.02, P=.03). PT decreased child problem behaviors at 3 (-0.90, 95% CI, -1.52 to -0.28, P=.005) and 6 months (-0.77, 95% CI, -1.39 to -0.14, P=.02) relative to the Toolkit. Children receiving PT also developed comparatively fewer caries over 3 months (ratio of rate ratios = 0.73, 95% CI, 0.54 to 0.99, P=.04). CONCLUSIONS: Parent training represents a promising approach for improving oral hygiene and oral health in underserved children with ASD at risk for dental problems.
35211554|a|BACKGROUND: Autism is the most common clinical developmental disorder in children. The childhood autism rating scale (CARS) and autistic autism behavior checklist (ABC) are the most commonly used assessment scales for diagnosing autism. However, the diagnostic validations and the corresponding cutoffs for CARS and ABC in individuals with suspected autism spectrum disorder (ASD) remain unclear. Furthermore, for suspected ASD in China, it remains unclear whether CARS is a better diagnostic tool than ABC. Also unclear is whether the current cutoff points for ABC and CARS are suitable for the accurate diagnosis of ASD. AIM: To investigate the diagnostic validity of CARS and ABC based on a large Chinese sample. METHODS: A total of 591 outpatient children from the ASD Unit at Beijing Children's Hospital between June and November 2019 were identified. First, the Clancy autism behavior scale (CABS) was used to screen out suspected autism from these children. Then, each suspected ASD was evaluated by CARS and ABC. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was used to compare diagnostic validations. We also calculated the area under the curve (AUC) for both CARS and ABC. RESULTS: We found that the Cronbach alpha coefficients of CARS and ABC were 0.772 and 0.426, respectively. Therefore, the reliability of the CARS was higher than that of the ABC. In addition, we found that the correlation between CARS and CABS was 0.732. Next, we performed ROC curve analysis for CARS and ABC, which yielded AUC values of 0.846 and 0.768, respectively. The cutoff value, which is associated with the maximum Youden index, is usually applied as a decision threshold. We found that the cutoff values of CARS and ABC were 34 and 67, respectively. CONCLUSION: This result indicated that CARS is superior to ABC in the Chinese population with suspected ASD.
35211042|a|Background: Treatment development for neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is impeded by heterogeneity in clinical manifestation and underlying etiologies. Symptom traits such as aberrant sensory reactivity are present across NDDs and might reflect common mechanistic pathways. Here, we test the effectiveness of repurposing a drug candidate, bumetanide, on irritable behavior in a cross-disorder neurodevelopmental cohort defined by the presence of sensory reactivity problems. Methods: Participants, aged 5-15 years and IQ >= 55, with ASD, ADHD, and/or epilepsy and proven aberrant sensory reactivity according to deviant Sensory Profile scores were included. Participants were randomly allocated (1:1) to bumetanide (max 1 mg twice daily) or placebo tablets for 91 days followed by a 28-day wash-out period using permuted block design and minimization. Participants, parents, healthcare providers, and outcome assessors were blinded for treatment allocation. Primary outcome was the differences in ABC-irritability at day 91. Secondary outcomes were differences in SRS-2, RBS-R, SP-NL, BRIEF parent, BRIEF teacher at D91. Differences were analyzed in a modified intention-to-treat sample with linear mixed models and side effects in the intention-to-treat population. Results: A total of 38 participants (10.1 [SD 3.1] years) were enrolled between June 2017 and June 2019 in the Netherlands. Nineteen children were allocated to bumetanide and nineteen to placebo. Five patients discontinued (n = 3 bumetanide). Bumetanide was superior to placebo on the ABC-irritability [mean difference (MD) -4.78, 95%CI: -8.43 to -1.13, p = 0.0125]. No effects were found on secondary endpoints. No wash-out effects were found. Side effects were as expected: hypokalemia (p = 0.046) and increased diuresis (p = 0.020). Conclusion: Despite the results being underpowered, this study raises important recommendations for future cross-diagnostic trial designs.
35211037|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and generalised joint hypermobility (GJH) share a number of clinical manifestations including proprioceptive impairment, motor difficulties, sensory hypersensitivity, and autonomic dysfunction. Clinical observations suggest that GJH is overrepresented in ASD. However, there are currently few systematic studies available. Knowledge about comorbidities may unfold common aetiopathological pathways underlying the association and improve the clinical management. The aim of this large, cross-sectional comparative study is to evaluate the relationship between ASD and GJH in adults. Data on joint hypermobility, symptoms associated with both hypermobility spectrum disorders (HSD) and hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (hEDS), lifetime psychiatric diagnoses, psychiatric rating scales for ASD and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and socio-demographics was collected for 199 individuals with ASD and 419 non-ASD community controls. Logistic regression models adjusting for covariates (age, sex, ethnicity) revealed a significant relationship between ASD and GJH and between ASD and symptomatic GJH, with adjusted odds ratios of 3.1 (95% CI: 1.9, 5.2; p < 0.001) and 4.9 (95% CI: 2.6, 9.0; p < 0.001), respectively. However, the high prevalence of comorbid ADHD in the study sample reduces the generalizability of the results among individuals with ASD without comorbid ADHD. Possibly, an additional ADHD phenotype is the primary driver of the association between ASD and GJH. Furthermore, GJH with additional self-reported symptoms, suggestive of HSD/hEDS, showed a stronger association with ASD than did non-specified GJH, indicating that symptomatic GJH plays a greater role in the relationship than non-specified GJH does. Therefore, the current study underscores the need of careful sample subclassifications. ASD with GJH may represent a novel subgroup of ASD in terms of aetiopathology and clinical presentation. Future research should elucidate the aetiological factors behind the association between ASD and GJH and evaluate how the comorbidity of GJH affects ASD outcomes.
35211000|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of complex neurodevelopment disorders characterized by altered brain connectivity. However, the majority of neuroimaging studies for ASD focus on the static pattern of brain function and largely neglect brain activity dynamics, which might provide deeper insight into the underlying mechanism of brain functions for ASD. Therefore, we proposed a framework with Hidden Markov Model (HMM) analysis for resting-state functional MRI (fMRI) from a large multicenter dataset of 507 male subjects. Specifically, the 507 subjects included 209 subjects with ASD and 298 well-matched health controls across 14 sites from the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE). Based on the HMM, we can identify the recurring brain function networks over time across ASD and healthy controls (HCs). Then we assessed the dynamical configuration of the whole-brain networks and further analyzed the community structure of transitions across the brain states. Based on the 19 HMM states, we found that the global temporal statistics of the specific HMM states (including fractional occupancies and lifetimes) were significantly altered in ASD compared to HCs. These specific HMM states were characterized by the activation pattern of default mode network (DMN), sensory processing networks [including visual network, auditory network, and sensory and motor network (SMN)]. Meanwhile, we also find that the specific modules of transitions between states were closely related to ASD. Our findings indicate the temporal reconfiguration of the brain network in ASD and provide novel insights into the dynamics of the whole-brain networks for ASD.
35210953|a|Background: Play is an essential parameter of children's growth and expression and this is the reason of why the use of play therapy is considered as fundamental means of preventing and dealing with problems and difficulties presented to children. Objective: The aim of this paper is to review the parameters related to this issue, emphasizing the efficacy of this therapeutic approach to various problems of children. Methods: A review of the recent literature on the issue, searching through Greek and international databases (Medline, Heal-link), in English and Greek language. Results: The review shows that play therapy as a form of prevention and treatment is suitable mainly for preschool and school age children. It is addressed to children who are in a transition period of their lives (after a divorce, a loss), with difficulties in managing feelings, in socializing or children who have behavioral problems. It is also addressed to children who have been witnesses of domestic violence, who have suffered some form of abuse, children who are to undergo a major surgery or those who have speech disorders. Furthermore, it is suitable for children who have some kind of developmental disorder (autism or attention deficit / hyperactivity disorder). Its efficiency is demonstrated by numerous research papers reporting a significant decrease of negative emotions and behaviors by its use. Conclusion: Play therapy is an alternative proposal of intervention on important issues related to children. Its implementation and value is widely known and is constantly expanding. The only condition for its implementation is the correct theoretical training of the professionals and the proper diagnosis.
35210946|a|Background: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental disability, which is a biologically based neurodevelopmental disorder that affects a child's social interaction and communication skills. Core deficits are identified in two domains: social communication/interaction and restrictive, repetitive patterns of behavior. Children and youth with ASD have service needs in behavioral, educational, health, leisure, family support, and other areas. Autism is a set of heterogeneous neurodevelopmental conditions, characterized by inability to acquire social skills, repetitive behaviors and failure of speech and nonverbal communication development. Objective: To examine frequency, correlation and predictivity of communication and language skills of autistic spectrum disorders (ASD) children and their parents' emotions. Methods: The sample consisted of 80 participants who are parents of children with ASD. The study was performed using a questionnaire made out for this research. Three groups of variables were analyzed: parental emotions variables; child's communication variables, child's language variables. Statistical analysis was performed by SPSS, and included basic statistical parameters and multiple regression analysis. Results: The most common ways of communicate for children with ASD are: Allowing to cuddle; Recognizes familiar faces; and Makes it known when he needs help or wants an item. The most common language forms of children ASD are: Following simple instructions; Understanding connected words/phrases; Pronouncing single words; and Looking at when called by name. Parents of children with ASD expressed the greatest agreement with the following statements: "My child is more demanding than most other children"; "It seems to me that my child is very sensitive and easily upset"; "My child can't do much of what he's expected to know to do", and "I often lack energy." Conclusion: Parents of children with ASD proved that their children have significant delays in communication and language. Developed communication and language skills of the child with ASD are valid predictors of parents' emotions/attitudes. Speech and language therapy work focused on developing the ASD child's communication and language skills can be expected to improve parents' emotions/attitudes.
35210779|a|Background: The Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R) is an essential semi-structured diagnostic tool for autism spectrum disorder (ASD). This study aims to validate the Chinese version of the ADI-R in Taiwan. Methods: The Chinese version of the ADI-R was translated and back-translated by professional translators and was approved by the original authors. A group of child psychiatrists and psychologists corrected medical terminology for the final version. Then, a total of 74 participants with ASD (male, 59, 79.73%) and 33 control participants without ASD (male, 16, 48.48%) were recruited. All participants were between 3 years 4 months to 41 years old (mean: 14.63 +- 7.93 years). Exploratory factor analysis (EFA) was used to measure the factor structure. Results: Cronbach's alpha showed good to excellent internal consistency (0.78-0.98) over the three core symptom domains of the Chinese version of the ADI-R. Pearson's correlation analysis revealed very high test-retest reliability (Pearson's correlation coefficients ranging from 0.95 to 0.99). EFA supported three categories of factors. For correct diagnosis of ASD, the Chinese version of the ADI-R had high sensitivity (97.30%), specificity (100%), positive predictive value (PPV) (100%), and negative predictive value (NPV) (94.29%). All domains also showed excellent area under the curves (0.991-1), sensitivity (94.59-98.65%), specificity (96.97-100%), Youden index (94.59-98.65%), PPV (97.78-100%), NPV (89.19-100%), positive likelihood ratio (32.55-33.00%) and negative likelihood ratio (0.00-0.05) after statistical examination. Conclusion: The Chinese version of the ADI-R is a reliable and valid diagnostic tool for the diagnosis of ASD in Clinical settings in Taiwan.
35209985|a|OBJECTIVES: To study the serum levels of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and their association with the core symptoms of ASD. METHODS: A total of 150 ASD children aged 2-7 years (ASD group) and 165 healthy children matched for age and sex (control group) who were recruited at the outpatient service of Chongqing Health Center for Women and Children were enrolled as subjects. Autism Behavior Checklist (ABC) and Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) were used to evaluate the core symptoms of the ASD children. Chemiluminescence was used to measure the serum levels of IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 in both groups. RESULTS: The ASD group had a significantly lower serum level of IGF-1 than the control group (P<0.05). The children with severe ASD had significantly lower serum levels of IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 than those with mild-to-moderate ASD (P<0.001). For the children aged 2-3 years, the ASD group had a significantly lower serum level of IGF-1 than the control group (P<0.05). Boys had a significantly lower serum level of IGF-1 than girls in both ASD and control groups (P<0.05). The serum levels of IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 were negatively correlated with the total score of CARS (r=-0.32 and -0.40 respectively, P<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: The reduction in serum IGF-1 level in early childhood may be associated with the development of ASD, and the serum levels of IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 are associated with the core symptoms of ASD children.
35209100|a|Voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs) are widely expressed in the brain, heart and vessels, smooth and skeletal muscle, as well as in endocrine cells. VGCCs mediate gene transcription, synaptic and neuronal structural plasticity, muscle contraction, the release of hormones and neurotransmitters, and membrane excitability. Therefore, it is not surprising that VGCC dysfunction results in severe pathologies, such as cardiovascular conditions, neurological and psychiatric disorders, altered glycemic levels, and abnormal smooth muscle tone. The latest research findings and clinical evidence increasingly show the critical role played by VGCCs in autism spectrum disorders, Parkinson's disease, drug addiction, pain, and epilepsy. These findings outline the importance of developing selective calcium channel inhibitors and modulators to treat such prevailing conditions of the central nervous system. Several small molecules inhibiting calcium channels are currently used in clinical practice to successfully treat pain and cardiovascular conditions. However, the limited palette of molecules available and the emerging extent of VGCC pathophysiology require the development of additional drugs targeting these channels. Here, we provide an overview of the role of calcium channels in neurological disorders and discuss possible strategies to generate novel therapeutics.
35208179|a|Several metabolomics-based studies have provided evidence that autistic subjects might share metabolic abnormalities with gut microbiota dysbiosis and alterations in gut mucosal permeability. Our aims were to explore the most relevant metabolic perturbations in a group of autistic children, compared with their healthy siblings, and to investigate whether the increased intestinal permeability may be mirrored by specific metabolic perturbations. We enrolled 13 autistic children and 14 unaffected siblings aged 2-12 years; the evaluation of the intestinal permeability was estimated by the lactulose:mannitol test. The urine metabolome was investigated by proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1H-NMR) spectroscopy. The lactulose:mannitol test unveiled two autistic children with altered intestinal permeability. Nine metabolites significantly discriminated the urine metabolome of autistic children from that of their unaffected siblings; however, in the autistic children with increased permeability, four additional metabolites-namely, fucose, phenylacetylglycine, nicotinurate, and 1-methyl-nicotinamide, strongly discriminated their urine metabolome from that of the remaining autistic children. Our preliminary data suggest the presence of a specific urine metabolic profile associated with the increase in intestinal permeability.
35207687|a|With the advent of genome-wide screening methods-beginning with microarray technologies and moving onto next generation sequencing methods-the era of precision and personalized medicine was born. Genomics led the way, and its contributions are well recognized. However, "other-omics" fields have rapidly emerged and are becoming as important toward defining disease causes and exploring therapeutic benefits. In this review, we focus on the impacts of transcriptomics, and its extension-epitranscriptomics-on personalized and precision medicine efforts. There has been an explosion of transcriptomic studies particularly in the last decade, along with a growing number of recent epitranscriptomic studies in several disease areas. Here, we summarize and overview major efforts for cancer, cardiovascular disease, and neurodevelopmental disorders (including autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability) for transcriptomics/epitranscriptomics in precision and personalized medicine. We show that leading advances are being made in both diagnostics, and in investigative and landscaping disease pathophysiological studies. As transcriptomics/epitranscriptomics screens become more widespread, it is certain that they will yield vital and transformative precision and personalized medicine contributions in ways that will significantly further genomics gains.
35207636|a|The most recent Center for Disease Control and Prevention estimates suggest that 1 in every 44 children (>2%) in the United States (US) is affected by autism spectrum disorder (ASD) [...].
35206643|a|BACKGROUND: The prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) has been increasing for the past two decades. Parents with autism have been known to be at risk of psychological distress and maladaptation, but many parents were able to overcome this adversity and lead to a good quality of life. METHODS: In-depth interviews were conducted among 21 parents of children with ASD. Interviews were transcribed and evaluated using thematic analysis. RESULTS: The analysis discovered three main themes: acceptance and positive outlook, reaching for helping hands, and understanding autism and finding its solutions. CONCLUSIONS: Although the findings cannot be generalised to other populations with ASD, this study provides a detailed perspective on their unique coping strategies. Insights gained from this study could help health care providers, authorities, and communities to address a specific need and able to advocate relevant support measures to assist them.
35205424|a|Gene-based rare variant association studies (RVASs) have low power due to the infrequency of rare variants and the large multiple testing burden. To correct for multiple testing, traditional false discovery rate (FDR) procedures which depend solely on P-values are often used. Recently, Independent Hypothesis Weighting (IHW) was developed to improve the detection power while maintaining FDR control by leveraging prior information for each hypothesis. Here, we present a framework to increase power of gene-based RVASs by incorporating prior information using IHW. We first build supervised machine learning models to assign each gene a prediction score that measures its disease risk, using the input of multiple biological features, fed with high-confidence risk genes and local background genes selected near GWAS significant loci as the training set. Then we use the prediction scores as covariates to prioritize RVAS results via IHW. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this framework through applications to RVASs in schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorder. We found sizeable improvements in the number of significant associations compared to traditional FDR approaches, and independent evidence supporting the relevance of the genes identified by our framework but not traditional FDR, demonstrating the potential of our framework to improve power of gene-based RVASs.
35205412|a|Autism spectrum disorder is a neurodevelopmental disorder, affecting one in 160 children worldwide. The causes of autism are still poorly understood, but research shows the relevance of genetic factors in its pathophysiology, including the CHD8, SCN2A, FOXP1 and SYNGAP1 genes. Information about the genetic influence on various diseases, including autism, in the Amerindian population from Amazon, is still scarce. We investigated 35 variants of the CHD8, SCN2A, FOXP1, and SYNGAP1 gene in Amazonian Amerindians in comparison with publicly available population frequencies from the 1000 Genomes Project database. Our study identified 16 variants in the Amerindian population of the Amazon with frequencies significantly different from the other populations. Among them, the SCN2A (rs17183814, rs75109281, and rs150453735), FOXP1 (rs56850311 and rs939845), and SYNGAP1 (rs9394145 and rs115441992) variants presented higher frequency than all other populations analyzed. In addition, nine variants were found with lower frequency among the Amerindians: CHD8 (rs35057134 and rs10467770), SCN2A (rs3769951, rs2304014, rs1838846, and rs7593568), FOXP1 (rs112773801 and rs56850311), and SYNGAP1 (rs453590). These data show the unique genetic profile of the indigenous population of the Brazilian Amazon. Knowledge of these variants can help to understand the pathophysiology and diagnosis of autism among Amerindians, Brazilians, and in admixed populations that have contributions from this ethnic group.
35205368|a|In clinical settings, the information provided by genetic testing can explain the triggers and processes underlying clinical presentations, such as neurodevelopmental disorders, in up to one third of affected individuals. However, translating this knowledge into better and more personalized clinical management to many appears a distant target. This article presents three paradigmatic cases to exemplify how this translational effort can, at least in some instances, be undertaken today with very positive results: (a) a young girl carrying a chr. 16p11.2 duplication can be screened using targeted exams and undertake therapeutic/preventive interventions related to her genetic diagnosis; (b) a 13-year-old boy with intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder carries a chr. 11q14.1 deletion, partly spanning the DLG2 gene important for synaptic function, and gained over 20 I.Q. points ostensibly due to carbolithium, prescribed in the absence of affective symptoms, exclusively following the pathophysiology pointed out by the genetic results; (c) a 58-year-old woman carries a COL3A1 gene variant responsible for the vascular form of Ehler-Danlos syndrome with colon rupture. Detection of this variant in six members of her extended family allows for better clinical management of the proband and targeted genetic counselling for family members at risk of this connective tissue disorder. The unprecedented flow of genetic information available today through new technologies, if interpreted in the light of current knowledge in clinical diagnosis and care of those with connective tissue disorders and neurodevelopmental disturbances, in biology and in neuropsychopharmacology, can promote better clinical and pharmacological treatment, disease surveillance, and management provided and incorporated into the clinical setting.
35205326|a|Fragile X syndrome (FXS) causes intellectual disability and is the known leading cause of autism. Common problems in FXS include behavior and social problems. Along with syndromic characteristics and autism comorbidity, environmental factors might influence these difficulties. This systematic review focuses on the last 20 years of studies concerning behavior and social problems in FXS, considering environmental and personal variables that might influence both problems. Three databases were reviewed, leading to fifty-one studies meeting the inclusion criteria. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) problems remain the greatest behavior problems, with behavioral problems and social competence being stable during the 20 years. Some developmental trajectories might have changed due to higher methodological control, such as aggressive behavior and attention problems. The socialization trajectory from childhood to adolescence remains unclear. Comorbidity with autism in individuals with FXS increased behavior problems and worsened social competence profiles. At the same time, comparisons between individuals with comorbid FXS and autism and individuals with autism might help define the comorbid phenotype. Environmental factors and parental characteristics influenced behavior problems and social competence. Higher methodological control is needed in studies including autism symptomatology and parental characteristics. More studies comparing autism in FXS with idiopathic autism are needed to discern differences between conditions.
35205303|a|A core yet understudied symptom of autism is aberrant eating behaviour, including extremely narrow food preferences. Autistic individuals often refuse to eat despite hunger unless preferred food is given. We hypothesised that, apart from aberrant preference, underfeeding stems from abnormal hunger processing. Utilising an adult male VPA rat, a model of autism, we examined intake of 'bland' chow in animals maintained on this diet continuously, eating this food after fasting and after both food and water deprivation. We assessed body weight in adulthood to determine whether lower feeding led to slower growth. Since food intake is highly regulated by brain processes, we looked into the activation (c-Fos immunoreactivity) of central sites controlling appetite in animals subjected to food deprivation vs. fed ad libitum. Expression of genes involved in food intake in the hypothalamus and brain stem, regions responsible for energy balance, was measured in deprived vs. sated animals. We performed our analyses on VPAs and age-matched healthy controls. We found that VPAs ate less of the 'bland' chow when fed ad libitum and after deprivation than controls did. Their body weight increased more slowly than that of controls when maintained on the 'bland' food. While hungry controls had lower c-Fos IR in key feeding-related areas than their ad libitum-fed counterparts, in hungry VPAs c-Fos was unchanged or elevated compared to the fed ones. The lack of changes in expression of feeding-related genes upon deprivation in VPAs was in contrast to several transcripts affected by fasting in healthy controls. We conclude that hunger processing is dysregulated in the VPA rat.
35205283|a|The prevalence of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) in Taiwan has been increasing, and genetic testing for ASD has been available and provided to parents of children diagnosed with ASD in Taiwan. However, there is still limited understanding of Taiwanese parents' knowledge of and attitudes toward such testing. Therefore, the present study addressed this gap by assessing the attitudes toward as well as actual and perceived knowledge of ASD genetic testing among Taiwanese parents of children diagnosed with ASD. A sample of 443 parents of children with ASD recruited from 236 public schools in Taiwan completed a paper-and-pencil survey. Although parents generally held favorable attitudes toward ASD genetic testing, they had deficient knowledge of such test (with only a 31.4% average correct rate on the actual knowledge scale). Tailored health education materials should be developed to improve the knowledge of ASD genetic testing among parents with affected children in Taiwan.
35205252|a|Rare post-zygotic mutations in the brain are now known to contribute to several neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, due to the limited availability of brain tissue, most studies rely on estimates of mosaicism from peripheral samples. In this study, we undertook whole exome sequencing on brain tissue from 26 ASD brain donors from the Harvard Brain Tissue Resource Center (HBTRC) and ascertained the presence of post-zygotic and germline mutations categorized as pathological, including those impacting known ASD-implicated genes. Although quantification did not reveal enrichment for post-zygotic mutations compared with the controls (n = 15), a small number of pathogenic, potentially ASD-implicated mutations were identified, notably in TRAK1 and CLSTN3. Furthermore, germline mutations were identified in the same tissue samples in several key ASD genes, including PTEN, SC1A,&nbsp;CDH13, and CACNA1C. The establishment of tissue resources that are available to the scientific community will facilitate the discovery of new mutations for ASD and other neurodevelopmental disorders.
35205244|a|MicroRNAs (miRNAs), which represent short (20 to 22 nt) non-coding RNAs, were found to play a direct role in the development of autism in children. Herein, a highly sensitive "silicon-on-insulator"-based nanosensor (SOI-NS) has been developed for the revelation of autism-associated miRNAs. This SOI-NS comprises an array of nanowire sensor structures fabricated by complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS)-compatible technology, gas-phase etching, and nanolithography. In our experiments described herein, we demonstrate the revelation of ASD-associated miRNAs in human plasma with the SOI-NS, whose sensor elements were sensitized with oligonucleotide probes. In order to determine the concentration sensitivity of the SOI-NS, experiments on the detection of synthetic DNA analogues of autism-associated miRNAs in purified buffer were performed. The lower limit of miRNA detection attained in our experiments amounted to 10-17 M.
35205231|a|In our previous study, in which array CGH was used on 19 Lebanese ASD subjects and their parents, we identified rare copy number variants (CNVs) in 14 subjects. The five remaining subjects did not show any CNVs related to autism spectrum disorders (ASD). In the present complementary study, we applied whole-exome sequencing (WES), which allows the identification of rare genetic variations such as single nucleotide variations and small insertions/deletions, to the five negative CNV subjects. After stringent filtering of initial data on the five families, three novel genes potentially related to neurodevelopment were identified, including a de novo mutation in the MIS18BP1 gene. In addition, genes already known to be related to ASD contained sequence variations. Our findings outline the potential involvement of the novel de novo mutation in the MIS18BP1 gene in the genetic etiology and pathophysiology of ASD and highlights the genetic complexity of these disorders. Further studies with larger cohorts of subjects are needed to confirm these observations, and functional analyses need to be performed to understand the precise pathophysiology in these cases.
35205182|a|In vitro multielectrode array (MEA) systems are increasingly used as higher-throughput platforms for functional phenotyping studies of neurons in induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) disease models. While MEA systems generate large amounts of spatiotemporal activity data from networks of iPSC-derived neurons, the downstream analysis and interpretation of such high-dimensional data often pose a significant challenge to researchers. In this review, we examine how MEA technology is currently deployed in iPSC modeling studies of neurodevelopmental disorders. We first highlight the strengths of in vitro MEA technology by reviewing the history of its development and the original scientific questions MEAs were intended to answer. Methods of generating patient iPSC-derived neurons and astrocytes for MEA co-cultures are summarized. We then discuss challenges associated with MEA data analysis in a disease modeling context, and present novel computational methods used to better interpret network phenotyping data. We end by suggesting best practices for presenting MEA data in research publications, and propose that the creation of a public MEA data repository to enable collaborative data sharing would be of great benefit to the iPSC disease modeling community.
35205014|a|A growing number of literature data suggest the presence of early impairments in the motor development of children with autism spectrum disorder, which could be often recognized even before the appearance of the classical social communication deficits of autism. In this narrative review, we aimed at performing an update about the available data on the early motor function in children with autism spectrum disorder. Early motor impairment in these children can manifest itself both as a mere delay of motor development and as the presence of atypicalities of motor function, such as a higher rate and a larger inventory, of stereotyped movements both with and without objects. In the perspective of a timely diagnosis, the presence of early motor signs can be an important clue, especially in an individual considered at high risk for autism. Motor and communication (both verbal and non-verbal) skills are connected and a pathogenetic role of early motor dysfunctions in the development of autism can be hypothesized. From this, derives the importance of an early enabling intervention aimed at improving motor skills, which could also have favorable effects on other aspects of development.
35205005|a|The purpose of this review is to provide an overview of findings from selected research published between 2012 and 2022 in English-language peer-reviewed journals to evaluate the effectiveness of the parent-implemented Early Start Denver Model (P-ESDM). Thirteen studies used quantitative methods to examine the relationship between variables. We considered four categories of variables in the analysis: child characteristics, intervention intensity and duration, child outcome measures, and parent-related outcome measures and parental fidelity. The findings revealed positive child-parent-related outcomes. In addition, the quality of implementation, relating to parent fidelity, should be considered when evaluating the efficacy of the intervention. However, only half the studies revealed that the standard benchmark for acceptable fidelity was being achieved. Implications for future research and practice are discussed.
35204992|a|The proportion of females whose ASD diagnosis is missed is unknown. The ratio of males to females with ASD is generally quoted as 4:1, though it is believed that there are biases preventing females from being diagnosed and that the true ratio is lower. These biases have not been clearly identified or quantified. Starting with a clinical dataset of 1711 children <18 years old, four different methods were employed in an inductive study to identify and quantify the biases and calculate the proportion of females missed. A mathematical model was constructed to compare the findings with current published data. The true male-to-female ratio appears to be 3:4. Eighty percent of females remain undiagnosed at age 18, which has serious consequences for the mental health of young women.
35204977|a|In the present study, the effects of an intervention based on an augmented reality technology called Pictogram Room were examined. The objective of the intervention was to improve the responding to joint attention (RJA) skills of gaze following and pointing in six children on the autism spectrum between 3 and 8 years old. A multiple baseline single-subject experimental design was conducted for 12 weeks in a school setting. Results indicated that all of the participant children improved performance in RJA following the intervention. Improvements were maintained over time and generalised to real-world situations. These findings demonstrate that autistic children can improve their RJA skills with a targeted and engaging intervention based on an accessible augmented reality technology tool.
35204970|a|Children with developmental disabilities (DDs) have sensory modulation disorders that interrelate school performance. Virtual reality (VR) has demonstrated the potential to become a neuropsychological assessment modality. This study was conducted to explore the feasibility of the VR classroom for assessing their characteristics of gaze, school performance, and interoception. School-aged children were assigned to the DD group or control group. A VR classroom was designed to evaluate their gaze patterns to distracting events. Interoception was assessed using the Heart Rate Perception test and the Multidimensional Assessment of Interoceptive Awareness (MAIA). The DD group had a significantly longer gaze duration on the virtual teacher during 30-45 s of the VR classroom event (p < 0.05). The mean score of the quiz and the Heart Rate Perception test showed a significant tendency to be lower than the children of the control group. The DD group scored significantly lower in six of eight subscales of the MAIA. These results showed the potential of VR classroom to evaluate the difference of sensory modulation between school-aged children with DDs and typically developed children. Future research is necessary to investigate the validity of the VR environment used in this study.
35204903|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are characterized by differences in socio-pragmatic communication. These conditions are allocated within a "spectrum" of phenotypic variability. Virtual reality (VR) is a useful tool for healthcare intervention and particularly safely advancing social abilities in children with ASD. METHODS: In our study two types of intervention for improving social skills were compared: (i) emotional training obtained by the use of virtual reality (Gr1), (ii) traditional emotional training performed individually with a therapist (Gr2). We aimed to identify the intervention with the shortest acquisition time for the proposed social tasks. RESULTS: Our findings show that both types of intervention had the same acquisition time for the recognition of primary emotions. However, for the use of primary and secondary emotions, the group using VR showed shorter acquisition times. CONCLUSIONS: These findings together with previous preliminary datasuggest that VR can be a promising, dynamic and effective practice for the support of basic and complex social skills of these individuals.
35204887|a|This study aims to examine the usefulness of an ad hoc worksheet for an Interpersonal Problem-Solving Skills Program (SCI-Labour) the effectiveness of which was tested by Bonete, Calero, and Fernandez-Parra (2015). Data were taken from 44 adolescents and young adults with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) (age M = 19.73; SD = 3.53; 39 men and 5 women; IQ M = 96.27, SD = 15.98), compared to a matched group (in age, sex, and nonverbal IQ) of 48 neurotypical participants. The task was conceived to promote the generalization of interpersonal problem-solving skills by thinking on different possible scenarios in the workplace after the training sessions. The results show lower scores in the worksheet delivered for homework (ESCI-Generalization Task) in the ASD Group compared to neurotypicals in total scores and all domains (Problem Definition, Quality of Causes, and Solution Suitability) prior to program participation. In addition, after treatment, improvement of the ASD Group was observed in the Total Score ESCI-Generalization Task and in the domains of Problem Definition, Quality of Causes, Number or Alternatives and Consequences, Time, and Solution Suitability. This is a valuable task in furthering learning within the SCI-Labour Program and may be a supplementary material in addressing the difficulties of interpersonal skills within this population, both in the workplace and in daily life. In conclusion, this task may provide useful information for identifying key difficulties among this population and could be implemented in a clinical setting as a complement to the SCI-Labour Program.
35204844|a|Early identification of children with autism is necessary to support their social and communicative skills and cognitive, verbal, and adaptive development. Researchers have identified several barriers to early diagnosis. Data collected in low- and middle-income contexts-where the vast majority of children in the world live-is scarce. In Ecuador, as in many other countries, estimates are lower compared to the global prevalence. Health authorities estimate a prevalence of 0.28% (0.18%-0.41%) in children aged five years old or less. Based on the hypothesis that, as in many parts of the world, children in Ecuador are not routinely screened and that this situation may result from poor recognition of this condition, our objective was to identify potential obstacles to case identification in pediatric settings. Several barriers, consistent with those identified in other countries, were reported by 153 participants on a survey, including lack of time, lack of resources to refer, fear of unnecessarily alarming families, and lack of information to guide families with concerns. The vast majority of participants are aware of the need for a screening tool for autism detection but report a lack of knowledge of its formal application. Most of the barriers reported in this study could be overcome by educational programs tailored to professional needs in order to support the well-being of children with autism and their families.
35204682|a|Various ASD risk alleles have been associated with impairment of NMDA receptor activation (i.e., NMDA Receptor Hypofunction) and/or disturbance of the careful balance between activation mediated by GluN2B-subtype and GluN2A-subtype-containing NMDA receptors. Importantly, although these various risk alleles affect NMDA receptor activation through different mechanisms, they share the pathogenic consequences of causing disturbance of highly regulated NMDA receptor activation. Disturbances of NMDA receptor activation due to sequence variants, protein termination variants and copy number variants are often cell-specific and regionally selective. Thus, translational therapeutic NMDA receptor agonist interventions, which may require chronic administration, must have specificity, selectivity and facilitate NMDA receptor activation in a manner that is physiologic (i.e., mimicking that of endogenously released glutamate and glycine/D-serine released in response to salient and relevant socio-cognitive provocations within discrete neural circuits). Importantly, knockout mice with absent expression and mice with haploinsufficient expression of the deleterious genes often serve as good models to test the potential efficacy of promising pharmacotherapeutic strategies. The Review considers diverse examples of "illness" genes, their pathogenic effects on NMDA receptor activation and, when available, results of studies of impaired sociability in mouse models, including "proof of principle/proof of concept" experiments exploring NMDA receptor agonist interventions and the development of promising positive allosteric modulators (PAMs), which serve as support and models for developing an inventory of PAMs and negative allosteric modulators (NAMs) for translational therapeutic intervention. Conceivably, selective PAMs and NAMs either alone or in combination will be administered to patients guided by their genotype in order to potentiate and/or restore disrupted balance between activation mediated by GluN2B-subtype and GluN2A-subtype containing NMDA receptors.
35204046|a|Facial expression processing mainly depends on whether the facial features related to expressions can be fully acquired, and whether the appropriate processing strategies can be adopted according to different conditions. Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have difficulty accurately recognizing facial expressions and responding appropriately, which is regarded as an important cause of their social disorders. This study used eye tracking technology to explore the internal processing mechanism of facial expressions in children with ASD under the influence of spatial frequency and inversion effects for improving their social disorders. The facial expression recognition rate and eye tracking characteristics of children with ASD and typical developing (TD) children on the facial area of interest were recorded and analyzed. The multi-factor mixed experiment results showed that the facial expression recognition rate of children with ASD under various conditions was significantly lower than that of TD children. TD children had more visual attention to the eyes area. However, children with ASD preferred the features of the mouth area, and lacked visual attention and processing of the eyes area. When the face was inverted, TD children had the inversion effect under all three spatial frequency conditions, which was manifested as a significant decrease in expression recognition rate. However, children with ASD only had the inversion effect under the LSF condition, indicating that they mainly used a featural processing method and had the capacity of configural processing under the LSF condition. The eye tracking results showed that when the face was inverted or facial feature information was weakened, both children with ASD and TD children would adjust their facial expression processing strategies accordingly, to increase the visual attention and information processing of their preferred areas. The fixation counts and fixation duration of TD children on the eyes area increased significantly, while the fixation duration of children with ASD on the mouth area increased significantly. The results of this study provided theoretical and practical support for facial expression intervention in children with ASD.
35204027|a|Overall, the present pilot study provides detailed information on clinical management for Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) referral and diagnosis processes that are mandatory for child and adolescent mental health management. The analysis of ASD management, even if carried out on a selected sample of Child and Adolescent Mental Health (CAMH) units, represents a good approximation of how, in Italian outpatient settings, children and adolescents with ASD are recognised and eventually diagnosed. One of the aims of the study was to verify the adherence of Italian CAMH units to international recommendations for ASD referral and diagnosis and whether these processes can be traced using individual chart reports. Overall, the analysis evidenced that Italian CAMH units adopt an acceptable standard for ASD diagnosis, although the reporting of the ASD managing process in the individual chart is not always accurate. Furthermore, data collected suggest some improvements that CAMH units should implement to fill the gap with international recommendations, namely, establishing a multidisciplinary team for diagnosis, improving the assessment of physical and mental conditions by the use of standardised tools, implementing a specific assessment for challenging behaviours that could allow timely and specific planning of intervention.
35204020|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a heterogeneous condition characterized by deficits in social communication and a repetitive pattern of behavior, with recent Italian prevalence estimates of 1 in 77. Although the core behavioral features of ASD appear to emerge within the first two years of life, clinical diagnosis is often not received before the third birthday. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) has recommended that primary care physicians routinely screen for ASD at the 18- and 24-month visits. In Italy, the Guidelines of the Italian National Institute for Health (ISS) recommend the Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (CHAT) as a screening tool for ASD, which compares parent responses with a semistructured observation by a healthcare provider. In the Italian National Health System, pediatricians have regular visits with all children; however, there is wide variability in following screening guidelines, and some barriers have been detected. For these reasons, other studies have highlighted the advantages of using telemedicine with the potential for enhancing ASD screening practices. The current study is an examination of the implementation of the first Italian online web-based screening tool (Web Italian Network for Autism Spectrum DisorderWIN4ASD), an innovative web app for pediatricians. We present the data obtained from the screening activity through the platform by a small group of pediatricians. The results of this study show that the implemented web-based platform appears to be an effective, efficient, and sustainable way to integrate screening services into primary care.
35204013|a|The first step for a harmonious bio-psycho-social framework in approaching autism spectrum disorders (ASD) is overcoming the conflict between the biological and the psychosocial perspective. Biological research can provide clues for a correct approach to clinical practice, assuming that it would lead to the conceptualization of a pathogenetic paradigm able to account for epidemiologic and clinical findings. The upward trajectory in ASD prevalence and the systemic involvement of other organs besides the brain suggest that the epigenetic paradigm is the most plausible one. The embryo-fetal period is the crucial window of opportunity for keeping neurodevelopment on the right tracks, suggesting that women's health in pregnancy should be a priority. Maladaptive molecular pathways beginning in utero, in particular, a vicious circle between the immune response, oxidative stress/mitochondrial dysfunction, and dysbiosis-impact neurodevelopment and brain functioning across the lifespan and are the basis for progressive multisystemic disorders that account for the substantial health loss and the increased mortality in ASD. Therefore, the biological complexity of ASD and its implications for health requires the enhancement of clinical skills on these topics, to achieve an effective multi-disciplinary healthcare model. Well-balanced training courses could be a promising starting point to make a change.
35203983|a|The prevalence of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has starkly increased, instigating research into risk factors for ASD. This research has identified immune risk factors for ASD, along with evidence of immune dysfunction and excess inflammation frequently experienced by autistic individuals. Increased innate inflammatory cytokines, including interleukin (IL)-6, are seen repeatedly in ASD; however, the origin of excess IL-6 in ASD has not been identified. Here we explore specific responses of circulating monocytes from autistic children. We isolated CD14+ monocytes from whole blood and stimulated them for 24 h under three conditions: media alone, lipoteichoic acid to activate TLR2, and lipopolysaccharide to activate TLR4. We then measured secreted cytokine concentrations in cellular supernatant using a human multiplex bead immunoassay. We found that after TLR4 activation, CD14+ monocytes from autistic children produce increased IL-6 compared to monocytes from children with typical development. IL-6 concentration also correlated with worsening restrictive and repetitive behaviors. These findings suggest dysfunctional activation of myeloid cells, and may indicate that other cells of this lineage, including macrophages, and microglia in the brain, might have a similar dysfunction. Further research on myeloid cells in ASD is warranted.
35203938|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complex developmental condition that affects the whole family. The gap between childrens' needs and their satisfaction, especially regarding what concerns the presence of social and healthcare services, is still a source of burden, particularly after the transition to adulthood. Our study aimed to gather a comprehensive view on how parents of adults with ASD perceive (and interact with) health and social services, and how the provision of care impacts family quality of life with the aim to advise ASD intervention programs. The goal is to identify specific areas of change useful to influence autism intervention strategies so that they more effectively meet the needs of young people with autism and their families. METHODS: We conducted two focus groups with parents of young adults with ASD. A semi-structured focus group methodology was adopted. The QoL conceptual framework guided data collection and analysis as part of a directed theory-driven content analysis approach. RESULTS: The lack of structured care pathways and the low level of integration of different services were the main limits reported by parents during the focus group, while a shared positive perception of the experience conducted together as caring families emerged. CONCLUSIONS: The experience here reported claims for a greater role of the institutions in order to facilitate the building of networks that are really inclusive for persons with autism in society and to support the implementation of innovative solutions for the welfare system. Furthermore, parents stressed the need for the provision of support to the family.
35203911|a|Multimedia technologies and virtual reality offer unique possibilities to manipulate sensory, motor, interpersonal, and cognitive processes contributing to atypical developmental trajectories, thus holding an explosive potential to design innovative and engaging interventions. However, there has been little progress in developing interventions that go beyond the patient's diagnosis or the fascination of technology and rather spring from a deep understanding of the specific neuropsychological processes to be nurtured in individuals. This perspective paper outlines how recent insights from developmental cognitive neuroscience can be leveraged to promote children's multidimensional development and highlight future directions and challenges for innovating both research and clinical practice. Finally, we focus on some practical examples of multimedia and virtual reality activities we have designed to stimulate bodily-self experiences, which are crucial for building up a coherent sense of self and lay the foundation for interacting with the external world. Atypical bodily self is an early marker of heterogeneous neurodevelopmental conditions (such as autism spectrum disorders) and seems to be under-targeted in research and clinical approaches.
35203901|a|Sensory processing differences are an established feature of both syndromic and non-syndromic Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs). Significant work has been carried out to characterize and classify specific sensory profiles in non-syndromic autism. However, it is not known if syndromic autism disorders, such as Phelan-McDermid Syndrome (PMD) or SYNGAP1-related Intellectual Disability (SYNGAP1-ID), have unique sensory phenotypes. Understanding the sensory features of these disorders is important for providing appropriate care and for understanding their underlying mechanisms. Our objective in this work was to determine the sensory processing abnormalities present in two syndromic ASDs: Phelan-McDermid Syndrome and SYNGAP1-related Intellectual Disability. Using a standardized instrument, the Short Sensory Profile-2, we characterized sensory features in 41 patients with PMD and 24 patients with SYNGAP1-ID, and sub-scores were then calculated for seeking, avoiding, sensitivity and registration, as well as overall sensory and behavior scores. We found both patient groups exhibited atypical sensory features, including high scores in the areas of avoiding and seeking. Thus, we discovered significant sensory processing abnormalities are common in these syndromic ASDs. Measurements of sensory processing could serve as useful clinical endpoints for trials of novel therapeutics for these populations.
35203088|a|N epsilon-lysine acetylation within the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum is a recently characterized protein quality control system that positively selects properly folded glycoproteins in the early secretory pathway. Overexpression of the endoplasmic reticulum acetyl-CoA transporter AT-1 in mouse forebrain neurons results in increased dendritic branching, spine formation and an autistic-like phenotype that is attributed to altered glycoprotein flux through the secretory pathway. AT-1 overexpressing neurons maintain the cytosolic pool of acetyl-CoA by upregulation of SLC25A1, the mitochondrial citrate/malate antiporter and ATP citrate lyase, which converts cytosolic citrate into acetyl-CoA. All three genes have been associated with autism spectrum disorder, suggesting that aberrant cytosolic-to-endoplasmic reticulum flux of acetyl-CoA can be a mechanistic driver for the development of autism spectrum disorder. We therefore generated a SLC25A1 neuron transgenic mouse with overexpression specifically in the forebrain neurons. The mice displayed autistic-like behaviours with a jumping stereotypy. They exhibited increased steady-state levels of citrate and acetyl-CoA, disrupted white matter integrity with activated microglia and altered synaptic plasticity and morphology. Finally, quantitative proteomic and acetyl-proteomic analyses revealed differential adaptations in the hippocampus and cortex. Overall, our study reinforces the connection between aberrant cytosolic-to-endoplasmic reticulum acetyl-CoA flux and the development of an autistic-like phenotype.
35202556|a|INTRODUCTION: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are neurodevelopmental diseases characterized by communication inabilities, social interaction impairment, repetitive behavior, as well as learning problems. Although the exact mechanism underlying this disease is still obscure, researchers believe that several factors play a significant role in its development and pathogenesis. Some authors have reported an association between adipokines family and autism. C1q/TNF-related protein-1 (CTRP1) is a member of the adipokines family, and we hypothesized that this adipokine might have an influential role in the pathogenesis of ASDs. Since there is no specific marker for screening the disease, we evaluated CTRP1 as a potential marker for achieving this purpose. METHODS: Blood samples were collected from 82 (41 ASDs boys, 41 healthy boys as controls) children aged 5-7 years old. CTRP1 gene expression and CTRP1 serum level were measured by quantitative realtime-PCR and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay methods, respectively. RESULTS: It was found that CTRP1 is significantly elevated in autistic children in comparison to healthy controls, both at the gene expression level, as well as at the serum level; demonstrating a good diagnostic value with a good range of sensitivity and specificity for detecting ASDs. CONCLUSION: CTRP1 expression is elevated in ASDs boys aged 5-7 years old, suggesting a role for this adipokine in ASDs pathophysiology. Also, receiver operating characteristic curve analyses revealed that this adipokine could be utilized as a diagnostic biomarker for differentiating ASDs patients from healthy individuals along with other recently proposed biomarkers.
35202432|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurological and developmental condition that begins in infancy or earlier and lasts through the individual's lifetime. The aetiology and mechanisms of ASD are not yet fully understood, and current treatment comprises mainly education and rehabilitation, without significant improvement in the core symptoms. Recent studies suggest that microbiota change in children with ASD after the ingestion of probiotics may improve the balance of microbiota and thus ASD symptoms. OBJECTIVE: The objectives of this study are to evaluate the efficacy of probiotics on the symptoms of children with ASD and the possible mechanisms involved. METHODS: This is a prospective controlled trial. A total of 160 children with ASD will be stratified and allocated to placebo and probiotics groups randomised according to the severity of their ASD symptoms. The probiotics group will be given probiotics supplements orally twice a day for 3 months and the control group will be given a placebo at the same amount, in addition to the baseline therapy of education and rehabilitation. All the children will be evaluated systematically by using different scales, questionnaires before, during, and after 3 months' treatment, as well as 3 months after discontinuation. The potential impact of probiotics on immunity and inflammation, metabolism, and metagenome will also be investigated. DISCUSSION: Our previous study showed that the abundance of intestinal flora was greatly different in children with ASD, and that Bifidobacterium was associated with the severity of ASD. In the present study, we will investigate the impact of probiotics supplementation on the symptoms of Children with ASD, with the purpose of evaluating the possible therapeutic effects of additives on ASD and of providing a reference for clinical treatment. The results will help to disclose as yet unknown relationship between probiotics and ASD. TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study has been registered with Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR-2000037941).
35202393|a|Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) is the most prevalent cause of inherited mental deficiency and is the most common monogenetic cause of autism spectral disorder (ASD). Here, we demonstrate that disease-causing missense mutations in the conserved K homology (KH) RNA binding domains (RBDs) of FMRP cause defects in its ability to form RNA transport granules in neurons. Using molecular, genetic, and imaging approaches in the Drosophila FXS model system, we show that the KH1 and KH2 domains of FMRP regulate distinct aspects of neuronal FMRP granule formation, dynamics, and transport. Furthermore, mutations in the KH domains disrupt translational repression in cells and the localization of known FMRP target mRNAs in neurons. These results suggest that the KH domains play an essential role in neuronal FMRP granule formation and function which may be linked to the molecular pathogenesis of FXS.
35201902|a|PURPOSE: This tutorial introduces speech-language pathologists (SLPs) to strategies that promote and support self-advocacy among autistic college students. The discussion for this tutorial is grounded within the framework of the social model of disability and the need for addressing environmental barriers to communication and self-advocacy. METHOD: We provide a self-advocacy framework to guide SLPs in developing programs for autistic adults. We describe factors that impact self-advocacy in autistic college students and the role of university-based SLPs and speech-language pathology graduate students in program implementation. Scenarios and examples are included to aid SLPs in implementing the recommendations. CONCLUSIONS: Self-advocacy is a predictor of retention, adaptation, and graduation of autistic postsecondary students. Prior research on autistic self-advocacy is minimal, and guidance for SLPs on promoting and supporting self-advocacy of their autistic clients is limited. SLPs play a very important role as they can increase understanding and appreciation for autistic social communication differences among nonautistic peers and professors and address autistic stigma through meaningful engagement of autistic individuals in planning and program development.
35201786|a|Integration of experimental analyses of behavior and neuroscience provides an interpretation of a substantial number of the diverse behavioral deficits observed within the autism spectrum. To that end, the behavioral and neural conditions under which experience changes the environmental guidance of behavior are first described, that is, the conditions under which learning occurs. These findings lead to the conclusion that acquired reinforcers-events that function as reinforcers as the result of individual experience-satisfy the same requirements and ultimately engage the same neural system as unconditioned reinforcers. Acquired reinforcers are critical to the development of complex behavior and some of the behavioral problems seen in autism may be due to these deficits. Specific consequences of these deficits are described-including effects on automatic reinforcement, joint control, and joint attention. Environmental as well as genetic factors can produce neurodevelopmental errors that impair acquired reinforcement and a possible such factor is identified. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2022 APA, all rights reserved).
35201565|a|This review aimed to analyze the psychometric properties of standardized instruments that are used to measure pragmatic intervention effects in children with developmental language disorder. Following PRISMA structure, a comprehensive literature research was conducted in five electronic indexing databases: Central, PubMed, Medline, Web of Science and Scopus. Six studies between 2005 and 2019 were included and seven standardized instruments have been analyzed. All instruments present some evidence of validity and reliability, but none reported responsiveness. The instruments reviewed were not used for their original purpose, which may explain the results. The small number of studies prevent drawing clear conclusions. Future studies should focus on appropriate, valid, reliable, and responsive measures. Research focusing on psychometric properties is crucial, mostly about responsiveness.
35200402|a|Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have challenging behaviors, which are associated with difficulties in parenting. Deep pressure is a therapeutic modality in occupational therapy, and it was reported to produce a calming effect. This study aimed to determine whether the short-term use of an autism hug machine portable seat (AHMPS) improves behavioral and neurobiological stress in children with ASD, and to determine whether AHMPS with an inflatable wrap or manual pull is more effective. This study enrolled children with ASD who were administered with the inflatable wrap (group I) and manual pull (group II) for 20 min twice a week for 3 weeks. Conners' Parent Rating Scale-48 (CPRS-48) was used to rate behavioral improvements, and galvanic skin response (GSR) was used to measure sympathetic stress response. A total of 20 children with ASD (14 boys and 6 girls; aged 7-13 years) were included. CPRS-48 presented conduct problems: behavior was significantly decreased in the inflatable group (p = 0.007) compared to the manual pull group. The GSR captured a significant reduction in sympathetic response (p = 0.01) only in group I. Neurobiological stress was reduced in children who were wearing the AHMPS inflatable wrap; therefore, AHMPS inflatable wrap is an effective method to reduce emotional arousal.
35199493|a|Most published autism research, and the funding that supports it, remains focused on basic and clinical science. However, the public health impact of autism drives a compelling argument for utilizing a public health approach to autism research. Fundamental to the public health perspective is a focus on health determinants to improve quality of life and to reduce the potential for adverse outcomes across the general population, including in vulnerable subgroups. While the public health research process can be conceptualized as a linear, 3-stage path consisting of discovery - testing - translation/dissemination/implementation, in this paper we propose an integrated, cyclical research framework to advance autism public health objectives in a more comprehensive manner. This involves discovery of primary, secondary and tertiary determinants of health in autism; and use of this evidence base to develop and test detection, intervention, and dissemination strategies and the means to implement them in 'real world' settings. The proposed framework serves to facilitate identification of knowledge gaps, translational barriers, and shortfalls in implementation; guides an iterative research cycle; facilitates purposeful integration of stakeholders and interdisciplinary researchers; and may yield more efficient achievement of improved health and well-being among persons on the autism spectrum at the population-level. LAY SUMMARY: Scientists need better ways to identify and address gaps in autism research, conduct research with stakeholders, and use findings to improve the lives of autistic people. We recommend an approach, based in public health science, to guide research in ways that might impact lives more quickly.
35199482|a|Successful social communication is complex; it relies on effectively deploying and continuously revising one's behavior to fit the needs of a given conversation, partner, and context. For example, a skilled conversationalist may instinctively become less talkative with a quiet partner and more talkative with a chattier one. Prior research suggests that behavioral flexibility across social contexts can be a particular challenge for individuals with autism spectrum condition (ASC), and that difficulty adapting to the changing needs of a conversation contributes to communicative breakdowns and poor social outcomes. In this study, we examine whether reduced conversational adaptation, as measured by talkativeness, differentiates 48 verbally fluent children and teens with ASC from 50 neurotypical (NT) peers matched on age, intelligence quotient, and sex ratio. Participants completed the Contextual Assessment of Social Skills with two novel conversation partners. The first acted interested in the conversation and talked more (Interested condition), while the second acted bored and talked less (Bored condition). Results revealed that NT participants emulated their conversation partner's behavior by being more talkative in the Interested condition as compared to the Bored condition (z = 9.92, p < 0.001). In contrast, the ASC group did not differentially adapt their behavior to the Bored versus Interested context, instead remaining consistently talkative in both (p = 0.88). The results of this study have implications for understanding social communication and behavioral adaptation in ASC, and may be valuable for clinicians interested in improving conversational competence in verbally fluent individuals with autism. LAY SUMMARY: Social communication-including everyday conversations-can be challenging for individuals on the autism spectrum. In successful conversations, people tend to adjust aspects of their language to be more similar to their partners'. In this study, we found that children and teens with autism did not change their own talkativeness in response to a social partner who was more or less talkative, whereas neurotypical peers did. These findings have clinical implications for improving conversational competence in verbally fluent individuals with autism.
35199433|a|BACKGROUND: Positive behavioural support (PBS) can be effective in supporting children and young people (CYP) with developmental disabilities. This systematic review focused on describing the components and nine characteristics of PBS that have been used with CYP with developmental disabilities in special education settings, and the evidence for PBS effectiveness in these settings. Additionally, facilitators and barriers to PBS implementation, and experiences of stakeholders, were investigated. METHOD: Systematic searches followed a registered protocol, and 30 studies were identified, narratively synthesised, and critically appraised. RESULTS: From the 30 studies included, 10 reported the presence of all 9 PBS characteristics, 17 reported on 8 PBS characteristics, and 3 reported on 7 characteristics. Overall, 28 studies demonstrated significant decreases in behaviours that challenge and increases in alternative behaviours, if increasing alternative behaviours was part of the interventions. CONCLUSIONS: There was a lack of evidence on facilitators and barriers, and a lack of qualitative studies exploring experiences of stakeholders with PBS in special education settings. The available evidence suggested that not all studies reported on all PBS characteristics when describing the approach followed. In addition, available evidence suggested that most studies demonstrated effectiveness of PBS regarding the measured outcomes. Implications and future directions are discussed.
35199341|a|Herein, we discuss data concerning the involvement of transcription factor Yin Yang 1 (YY1) in the development of brain diseases, highlighting mechanisms of its pathological actions. YY1 plays an important role in the developmental and adult pathology of the nervous system. YY1 is essential for neurulation as well as maintenance and differentiation of neuronal progenitor cells and oligodendrocytes regulating both neural and glial tissues of the brain. Lack of a YY1 gene causes many developmental abnormalities and anatomical malformations of the central nervous system (CNS). Once dysregulated, YY1 exerts multiple neuropathological actions being involved in the induction of many brain disorders like stroke, epilepsy, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, autism spectrum disorder, dystonia, and brain tumors. A better understanding of YY1's dysfunction in the nervous system may lead to the development of novel therapeutic strategies related to YY1's actions.
35198865|a|How changes in brain scaling relate to altered behavior is an important question in neurodevelopmental disorder research. Mice with germline Pten haploinsufficiency (Pten +/-) closely mirror the abnormal brain scaling and behavioral deficits seen in humans with macrocephaly/autism syndrome, which is caused by PTEN mutations. We explored whether deviation from normal patterns of growth can predict behavioral abnormalities. Brain regions associated with sensory processing (e.g., pons and inferior colliculus) had the biggest deviations from expected volume. While Pten +/- mice showed little or no abnormal behavior on most assays, both sexes showed sensory deficits, including impaired sensorimotor gating and hyporeactivity to high-intensity stimuli. Developmental analysis of this phenotype showed sexual dimorphism for hyporeactivity. Mapping behavioral phenotypes of Pten +/- mice onto relevant brain regions suggested abnormal behavior is likely when associated with relatively enlarged brain regions, while unchanged or relatively decreased brain regions have little predictive value.
35198562|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) refers to a series of neurodevelopmental diseases characterized by two hallmark symptoms, social communication deficits and repetitive behaviors. Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is one of the most important inhibitory neurotransmitters in the central nervous system (CNS). GABAergic inhibitory neurotransmission is critical for the regulation of brain rhythm and spontaneous neuronal activities during neurodevelopment. Genetic evidence has identified some variations of genes associated with the GABA system, indicating an abnormal excitatory/inhibitory (E/I) neurotransmission ratio implicated in the pathogenesis of ASD. However, the specific molecular mechanism by which GABA and GABAergic synaptic transmission affect ASD remains unclear. Transgenic technology enables translating genetic variations into rodent models to further investigate the structural and functional synaptic dysregulation related to ASD. In this review, we summarized evidence from human neuroimaging, postmortem, and genetic and pharmacological studies, and put emphasis on the GABAergic synaptic dysregulation and consequent E/I imbalance. We attempt to illuminate the pathophysiological role of structural and functional synaptic dysregulation in ASD and provide insights for future investigation.
35197910|a|
35197818|a|The term autism spectrum disorder (ASD) includes a wide variability of clinical presentation, and this clinical heterogeneity seems to reflect a still unclear multifactorial etiopathogenesis, encompassing different genetic risk factors and susceptibility to environmental factors. Several studies and many theories recognize as mechanisms of autism a disruption of brain development and maturation time course, suggesting the existence of common neurobiological substrates, such as defective synaptic structure and aberrant brain connectivity. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) plays an important role in both assessment of region-specific structural changes and quantification of specific alterations in gray or white matter, which could lead to the identification of an MRI biomarker. In this study, we performed measurement of cortical thickness in a selected well-known group of preschool ASD subjects with the aim of finding correlation between cortical metrics and clinical scores to understand the underlying mechanism of symptoms and to support early clinical diagnosis. Our results confirm that recent brain MRI techniques combined with clinical data can provide some useful information in defining the cerebral regions involved in ASD although large sample studies with homogeneous analytical and multisite approaches are needed.
35197468|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is the fourth most common neurodevelopmental disorder, with a prevalence of 1 in 160 children. Accurate diagnosis relies on experts, but such individuals are scarce. This has led to increasing interest in the development of machine learning (ML) models that can integrate neuroimaging features from functional and structural MRI (fMRI and sMRI) to help reveal central nervous system alterations characteristic of ASD. We optimized and compared the performance of 12 of the most popular and powerful ML models. Each was separately trained using 15 different combinations of fMRI and sMRI features and optimized with an unbiased model search. Deep learning models predicted ASD with the highest diagnostic accuracy and generalized well to other MRI datasets. Our model achieves state-of-the-art 80% area under the ROC curve (AUROC) in diagnosis on test data from the IMPAC dataset; and 86% and 79% AUROC on the external ABIDE I and ABIDE II datasets (with further improvement to 93% and 90% after supervised domain adaptation). The highest performing models identified reproducible putative biomarkers for accurate ASD diagnosis in accord with known ASD markers as well as novel cerebellar biomarkers. Such reproducibility lends credence to their tremendous potential for defining and using a set of truly generalizable ASD biomarkers that will advance scientific understanding of neuronal changes in ASD.
35197135|a|BACKGROUND: Despite the widespread use of psychotropic medications in people with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), there is limited evidence to suggest that psychotropic medications including mood stabilisers are effective in individuals with ASD. AIMS: To carry out a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that assessed the effectiveness of mood stabilisers in people with ASD. METHOD: We searched the following databases: Cochrane Library, MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, PsycINFO, ERIC, DARE, and ClinicalTrials.gov. In addition, we hand-searched 12 relevant journals. We used the Cochrane Risk of Bias and Jadad scores to assess the quality of included RCTs. We carried out a meta-analysis using a random-effects model. RESULTS: We included eight RCTs (four on valproate, two on levetiracetam, and one each on lamotrigine and topiramate) that included a total of 310 people with ASD, primarily children. Outcomes were based on core and associated ASD symptoms including irritability and aggression but not bipolar disorder. Only two small studies (25%) from the same group showed definite superiority over placebo and one over psychoeducation alone. Meta-analysis of pooled data on the Aberrant Behaviour Checklist-irritability, Clinical Global Impression Scale-improvement, and Overt Aggression Scale (OAS)/OAS-modified did not show any significant inter-group difference. The rates of adverse effects did not show any significant inter-group difference. CONCLUSIONS: Given the methodological flaws in the included studies and the contradictory findings, it is difficult to draw any definitive conclusion about the effectiveness of mood stabilisers to treat either ASD core symptoms or associated behaviours. Robust large-scale RCTs are needed in the future to address this issue.PROSPERO registration: CRD42021255467 on 18 May 2021.
35197121|a|BACKGROUND: Clinical and etiological varieties remain major obstacles to decompose heterogeneity in autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Recently, neuroimaging raised new hope to identify neurosubtypes of ASD for further understanding the biological mechanisms behind the disorder. METHODS: In this study, brain structural MRI data and clinical measures of 221 male subjects with ASD and 257 healthy controls were selected from 7 independent sites from the Autism Brain Image Data Exchange database (ABIDE). Heterogeneity through discriminative analysis (HYDRA), a recently-proposed semi-supervised clustering method was utilized to divide individuals with ASD into several neurosubtypes by regional volumetric measures of gray matter, white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid. Voxel-wise volume, clinical measures, dynamic resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (R-fMRI) measures among different neurosubtypes of ASD were explored. In addition, support vector machine (SVM) model was applied to test whether the neurosubtyping of ASD could improve diagnostic accuracy of ASD. RESULTS: Two neurosubtypes of ASD with different voxel-wise volumetric patterns were revealed. The full-scale intelligence quotient (IQ), verbal IQ, Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) total scores and ADOS severity scores were significantly different between the two neurosubtypes, the total intracranial volume was correlated with performance IQ in Subtype 1 and was correlated with ADOS communication score and ADOS social score in Subtype 2. Compared with Subtype 2, Subtype 1 showed lower dynamic R-fMRI measures, lower dynamic functional architecture stability, higher mean and lower standard deviation (SD) of concordance among dynamic R-fMRI measures in cerebellum. In addition, classification accuracies between ASD neurosubtypes and healthy controls were significantly improved compared with classification accuracy between entire ASD group and healthy controls. LIMITATIONS: The present study excluded female subjects and left-handed subjects, which limited the ability to investigate the associations between these factors and the heterogeneity of ASD. CONCLUSIONS: The two distinct neuroanatomical subtypes of ASD validated by other data modalities not only adds reliability of the result, but also bridges from brain phenomenology to clinical behavior. The current neurosubtypes of ASD could facilitate understanding the neuropathology of this disorder and could be potentially used to improve clinical decision-making process and optimize treatment.
35196153|a|Very low birth weight infants (VLBW, <1500g) are at elevated risk of neurodevelopmental disorders, later obesity and cardiometabolic disease; if and how neurodevelopmental disorders impact chronic disease risk is poorly understood. The most common neurodevelopmental disorders experienced by VLBW children are those of social-emotional functioning. We compared dietary patterns and body composition between VLBW children with poor vs. typical social-emotional functioning using linear mixed models adjusted for sex, gestational age, cognitive impairment, parental education and BMI. VLBW children (n=158) attending the Donor Milk for Improved Neurodevelopmental Outcomes trial 5.5-year follow-up participated. Poor social-emotional functioning was based on standardized parent-rated questionnaires and/or parent-reported physician diagnosis of autism spectrum or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorders. Most children had diets categorized as 'needs improvement' (67%) or 'poor' (27%) and 29% of children exhibited poor social-emotional functioning. Poor social-emotional functioning was positively associated with 100% fruit juice (beta=0.3 cup equivalents/day; 95% CI 0.1, 0.5) and energy intake (beta=118.1 kcals/day; 95% CI 0.9, 235.2). Children with poor social-emotional functioning were more likely to have a limited food repertoire (p=0.02), but less likely to exceed dietary fat recommendations (p=0.04). No differences in overall diet quality or body composition were observed. Diet counselling and research are essential to improving the nutrition of VLBW children to mitigate chronic disease risk. Novelty:   Overall diet quality and body composition did not differ between VLBW children with poor vs. typical social-emotional functioning.   Most had diets "needing improvement" or "poor" according to the HEI 2010.   Diet counselling may help mitigate chronic disease risk in this vulnerable population.
35196138|a|PURPOSE: Cluttering is a fluency disorder that has been noted clinically in individuals with fragile X syndrome (FXS). Yet, cluttering has not been systematically characterized in this population, hindering identification and intervention efforts. This study examined the rates of cluttering in male young adults with FXS using expert clinical opinion, the alignment between expert clinical opinion and objectively quantified features of cluttering from language transcripts, and the association between cluttering and aspects of the FXS phenotype. METHOD: Thirty-six men with FXS (aged 18-26 years; M = 22, SD = 2.35) contributed language samples and completed measures of nonverbal cognition, autism symptoms, anxiety, and symptoms of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The presence of cluttering was determined by the consensus of two clinical experts in fluency disorders based on characteristics exhibited in the language sample. Cluttering features (speech rate, disfluencies, etc.) were also objectively quantified from the language transcripts. RESULTS: Clinical experts determined that 50% of participants met the criteria for a cluttering diagnosis. Phrase repetitions were the most salient feature that distinguished individuals who cluttered. Although the presence of cluttering was not associated with autism symptoms or mean length of utterance, cluttering was more likely to occur when nonverbal cognitive ability was higher, ADHD symptoms were elevated, and anxiety symptoms were low. CONCLUSIONS: Half of the male young adults with FXS exhibited cluttering, which supports FXS as a genetic diagnosis that is highly enriched for risk of cluttering. Cluttering was associated with increased ADHD symptoms and cognitive ability and reduced anxiety symptoms. This study contributes a new description of the clinical presentation of cluttering in men with FXS and may lead to improved understanding of the potential underlying mechanisms of cluttering and eventual refinements to treatment and diagnosis.
35195567|a|A 6-year-old boy with autistic spectrum disorder was diagnosed with tuberculosis infection following contact tracing of his mother who had isoniazid-resistant pulmonary tuberculosis. He progressed to develop mediastinal lymphadenopathy causing a persistent cough. He was too small to undergo endobronchial ultrasound-guided biopsy. As an alternative, he underwent esophageal endoscopic ultrasound-guided biopsy, leading to confirmation of the diagnosis. We believe this approach to diagnostic biopsy is underrecognized in pediatric practice, and highlight its utility with this case and a brief literature review.
35194728|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD), a heritable neurodevelopmental disorder, confers genetic liability that is often expressed among relatives through subclinical, genetically-meaningful traits, or endophenotypes. For instance, relative to controls, parents of individuals with ASD differ in language-related skills, with differences emerging in childhood. To examine ASD-related endophenotypes, this study investigated developmental academic profiles among clinically unaffected siblings of individuals with ASD (n = 29). Lower performance in language-related skills among siblings mirrored previously-reported patterns among parents, which were also associated with greater subclinical ASD-related traits in themselves and their parents, and with greater symptom severity in their sibling with ASD. Findings demonstrated specific phenotypes, derived from standardized academic testing, that may represent childhood indicators of genetic liability to ASD in first-degree relatives.
35193722|a|Instances of person-reference, in the form of personal pronouns, names, or terms of endearment, are frequently used in child-directed speech. Examining this aspect of parental input is especially relevant to children with autism, who experience difficulties with person-reference. In this study, we compared the person-reference during parent-child interactions of Bulgarian (N=37) and English-speaking (N=37) parents of children with autism, who were matched on the language ability of their child. English-speaking parents used significantly more personal pronouns to refer to their children, while Bulgarian-speaking parents used the child's name more along with kinship terms. Furthermore, Bulgarian-speaking parents used significantly more different ways to refer to their child. These group differences were interpreted in the context of structural differences in the pronominal systems of Bulgarian and English, and in terms of culturally different discourse practices.
35193719|a|A significant proportion of the global burden of disease can be attributed to mental illness. Despite important advances in identifying risk factors for mental health conditions, the biological processing underlying causal pathways to disease onset remain poorly understood. This represents a limitation to implement effective prevention and the development of novel pharmacological treatments. Epigenetic mechanisms have emerged as mediators of environmental and genetic risk factors which might play a role in disease onset, including childhood adversity (CA) and cannabis use (CU). Particularly, human research exploring DNA methylation has provided new and promising insights into the role of biological pathways implicated in the aetio-pathogenesis of psychiatric conditions, including: monoaminergic (Serotonin and Dopamine), GABAergic, glutamatergic, neurogenesis, inflammatory and immune response and oxidative stress. While these epigenetic changes have been often studied as disease-specific, similarly to the investigation of environmental risk factors, they are often transdiagnostic. Therefore, we aim to review the existing literature on DNA methylation from human studies of psychiatric diseases (i) to identify epigenetic modifications mapping onto biological pathways either transdiagnostically or specifically related to psychiatric diseases such as Eating Disorders, Post-traumatic Stress Disorder, Bipolar and Psychotic Disorder, Depression, Autism Spectrum Disorder and Anxiety Disorder, and (ii) to investigate a convergence between some of these epigenetic modifications and the exposure to known risk factors for psychiatric disorders such as CA and CU, as well as to other epigenetic confounders in psychiatry research.
35193144|a|Significant variations in brain functional connectivity exist in the healthy population, rendering the identification and characterization of their abnormalities in neuropsychiatric disorders difficult. Here, we proposed a new principal component analysis (PCA) approach to study variations in functional connectivity, focusing on major hubs of the salience network and default mode network, namely the anterior and posterior cingulate cortices. We analyzed the intersubject variability of human functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity obtained from healthy, autistic, and schizophrenic subjects. Utilizing data from 1000 Functional Connectomes Project, COBRE, and ABIDE 1 database, we characterized the normal variations of the cingulate cortices with respect to top PCA dimensions. We showed that functional connectivity variations of the 2 cingulate cortices are constrained, in a parallel manner, by competing or cooperating interactions with different sensorimotor, associative, and limbic networks. In schizophrenic and autistic subjects, diffuse and subtle network changes along the same dimensions were found, which suggest significant behavioral implications of the variational dimensions. Furthermore, we showed that individual dynamic functional connectivity tends to fluctuate along the principal components of connectivity variations across individuals. Our results demonstrate the strength of this new approach in addressing the intrinsic variations of network connectivity in human brain and identifying their subtle changes in neuropsychiatric disorders.
35192203|a|Auditory-visual conditional discrimination training (e.g., receptive identification training, listener responses; AVCD) is ubiquitous in early intervention and special education programs. Nevertheless, some learners with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) do not appear to benefit from this training despite use of empirically validated treatments. To prevent exposure to extended training that does not lead to learning, a skills assessment that measures skills related to AVCD training will be useful for educators and practitioners. The current study replicated the skills assessment developed and evaluated by Kodak et al. (2015) with 8 participants with ASD who received behavior analytic intervention that included at least 1 goal related to AVCD training. Two of the 8 participants mastered all skills included in the assessment except scanning. In addition, 5 participants' responding failed to reach mastery during subsequent exposure to AVCD training, which further demonstrated the predictive utility of the skills assessment.
35192114|a|PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review provides a highlight of existing evidence-based practices and community support systems that exist to enhance employment outcomes for autistic transition-age youth (TAY) and adults. An update is provided on the current status of these programs and the impact they are having on employment outcomes for this population. RECENT FINDINGS: Many programs exist that prove to be efficacious in improving employment outcomes. These programs can be categorized as vocational rehabilitation service system level interventions, provider and consumer level interventions targeting skills related to employment, and consumer level interventions delivered within community vocational rehabilitation or education settings. A more recent increase in programs is consistent with multiple research and policy calls for amplified programming in this area. Despite these recent increases, there is still a need to further develop effective programming to support employment outcomes as the growing autistic population age into adulthood. Community-based research and practice should continue to be developed and tested.
35191848|a|The COVID-19 pandemic accelerated the uptake of digital health worldwide and highlighted many benefits of these innovations. However, it also stressed the magnitude of inequalities regarding accessing digital health. Using a scoping review, this article explores the potential benefits of digital technologies for the global population, with particular reference to people living with disabilities, using the autism community as a case study. We ultimately explore policies in Sweden, Australia, Canada, Estonia, the United Kingdom, and the United States to learn how policies can lay an inclusive foundation for digital health systems. We conclude that digital health ecosystems should be designed with health equity at the forefront to avoid deepening existing health inequalities. We call for a more sophisticated understanding of digital health literacy to better assess the readiness to adopt digital health innovations. Finally, people living with disabilities should be positioned at the center of digital health policy and innovations to ensure they are not left behind.
35191798|a|OBJECTIVE: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are two increasing important problems among children. This study aims to explore the link between maternal polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and the risk of ASD and ADHD in the offspring. METHOD: The MOOSE guidelines were followed in the conduct of this meta-analysis. A literature search was done in PubMed/MEDLINE, Scopus, and Web of Science from inception until January 2021. The DerSimonian and Laird random-effects model was used to estimate the combined risk ratios (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). Sensitivity analysis was also used to investigate the effect of each study on the combined results. RESULTS: Seven studies, with 1,358,696 participants, comprising 7,334 ADHD cases and 3,920 ASD cases, were included in this study. Children born to mothers with maternal PCOS had higher risks of developing ASD (RR = 1.46, 95% CI: 1.26-1.69, I2 = 64%) and ADHD (RR = 1.43, 95% CI: 1.35-1.41, I2 = 0%) when compared with children born to mothers without maternal PCOS. CONCLUSION: This study showed that there might be a link between maternal PCOS and the risk of developing ASD and ADHD in the offspring. This important issue must be considered in PCOS women during and after pregnancy.
35191118|a|BACKGROUND: The world has suffered immeasurably during the COVID-19 pandemic. Increased distress and mental and medical health concerns are collateral consequences to the disease itself. The Genes to Mental Health (G2MH) Network consortium sought to understand how individuals affected by the rare copy number variations of 22q11.2 deletion and duplication syndrome, associated with neurodevelopmental/neuropsychiatric conditions, were coping. The article focuses on worry and disruptions in medical care caused by the pandemic. METHODS: The University of Pennsylvania COVID-19 Stressor List and care disruption questions were circulated by 22 advocacy groups in English and 11 other languages. RESULTS: A total of 512 people from 23 countries completed the survey; most were caregivers of affected individuals. Worry about family members acquiring COVID-19 had the highest average endorsed worry, whilst currently having COVID-19 had the lowest rated worry. Total COVID-19 worries were higher in individuals completing the survey towards the end of the study (later pandemic wave); 36% (n = 186) of the sample reported a significant effect on health due to care interruption during the pandemic; 44% of individuals (n = 111) receiving care for their genetic syndrome in a hospital setting reported delaying appointments due to COVID-19 fears; 12% (n = 59) of the sample reported disruptions to treatments; and of those reporting no current disruptions, 59% (n = 269) worried about future disruptions if the pandemic continued. Higher levels of care disruptions were related to higher COVID-19 worries (Ps < 0.005). Minimal differences by respondent type or copy number variation type emerged. CONCLUSIONS: Widespread medical care disruptions and pandemic-related worries were reported by individuals with 22q11.2 syndrome and their family members. Reported worries were broadly consistent with research results from prior reports in the general population. The long-term effects of COVID-19 worries, interruptions to care and hospital avoidance require further study.
35191027|a|The number of diagnoses of developmental disorders is on the rise and the use of labels for developmental disorders, such as attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorder, is widening. Diagnostic labels can play an important role in helping those who display atypical behaviour and their caregivers to cope with associated challenges and, possibly, to get treatment. But these labels are increasingly contested and associated with a variety of harmful effects. In this paper, we analyze the role diagnostic labels can play in four different contexts (scientific, therapeutic, social, and administrative) and identify what various stakeholders stand to gain or lose with continued, expanded, or abolished use of those labels. Our analysis reveals labels serve different purposes in each of these contexts, benefitting different stakeholders. Any overall evaluation, critique, or defence of labels needs to consider the interests of all stakeholders in these contexts.
35190617|a|Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most prevalent monogenic cause of intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Affected individuals have a high prevalence of hypocholesterolemia, however, the underlying mechanisms and the clinical significance remains unknown. We hypothesized that decrease in the plasma cholesterol levels is associated with an alteration of cholesterol content within the lipid rafts (LRs) which ultimately affects the clinical profile of FXS individuals. The platelets LRs were isolated by ultracentrifugation on sucrose gradient from 27 FXS and 25 healthy controls, followed by measurements of proteins, cholesterol, and gangliosides content. Autistic and adaptive behaviour of affected individuals were respectively assessed by the Social Communication Questionnaire and Adaptive Behavior Assessment System. Our results suggest a decrease in the cholesterol content of LRs in FXS individuals as compared to controls. As opposed to controls, LR cholesterol was significantly associated with plasma total cholesterol (r = 0.47; p = 0.042) in the FXS group. Furthermore, the correlation between LRs cholesterol and the clinical profile showed a significant association with autistic traits (r = - 0.67; p < 0.001) and adaptative behavior (r = 0.70; p < 0.001). These results support the clinical significance of LR cholesterol alterations in FXS. Further studies are warranted to investigate the implication of LRs in FXS pathophysiology and ASD.
35190550|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a collection of neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by deficits in social communication and restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior or interests. ASD is highly heritable, but genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous, reducing the power to identify causative genes. We performed whole genome sequencing (WGS) in an ASD cohort of 68 individuals from 22 families enriched for recent shared ancestry. We identified an average of 3.07 million variants per genome, of which an average of 112,512 were rare. We mapped runs of homozygosity (ROHs) in affected individuals and found an average genomic homozygosity of 9.65%, consistent with expectations for multiple generations of consanguineous unions. We identified potentially pathogenic rare exonic or splice site variants in 12 known (including KMT2C, SCN1A, SPTBN1, SYNE1, ZNF292) and 12 candidate (including CHD5, GRB10, PPP1R13B) ASD genes. Furthermore, we annotated noncoding variants in ROHs with brain-specific regulatory elements and identified putative disease-causing variants within brain-specific promoters and enhancers for 5 known ASD and neurodevelopmental disease genes (ACTG1, AUTS2, CTNND2, CNTNAP4, SPTBN4). We also identified copy number variants in two known ASD and neurodevelopmental disease loci in two affected individuals. In total we identified potentially etiological variants in known ASD or neurodevelopmental disease genes for ~61% (14/23) of affected individuals. We combined WGS with homozygosity mapping and regulatory element annotations to identify candidate ASD variants. Our analyses add to the growing number of ASD genes and variants and emphasize the importance of leveraging recent shared ancestry to map disease variants in complex neurodevelopmental disorders.
35190469|a|The cerebellum has been increasingly implicated in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) with many ASD-linked genes impacting both cerebellar function and development. However, the precise timing and critical periods of when abnormal cerebellar neurodevelopment contributes to ASD-relevant behaviors remains poorly understood. In this study, we identify a critical period for the development of ASD-relevant behaviors in a cerebellar male mouse model of Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC), by using the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor, rapamycin, to pharmacologically inhibit dysregulated downstream signaling. We find independent critical periods during which abnormal ASD-relevant behaviors develop for the two core ASD diagnostic criteria - social impairments and behavioral flexibility - and delineate an anatomical, physiological, and behavioral framework. These findings not only further our understanding of the genetic mechanisms underlying the timing of ASD-relevant behaviors but also have the capacity to inform potential therapies to optimize treatment interventions.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENTNo targeted treatments currently exist for ASD. This complex developmental disorder has established links to genetic and circuit aberrations, yet the precise timing and coordination of these underlying mechanisms that contribute to the spectrum of physiological and behavioral abnormalities remains unclear. Cerebellar pathology is consistently seen in ASD individuals; therefore, we sought to identify the specific windows for cerebellar involvement in the development of ASD-relevant behaviors. Using pharmacologic treatment paradigms, we outline distinct critical periods of developmental vulnerability for ASD-relevant social and inflexible behaviors. From this study, we posit a refined window of time during which ASD symptoms develop that will inform therapeutic timing.
35190271|a|Autism Spectrum disorder (ASD) is well known to be associated with significantly high rates of gastrointestinal problems, constipation being common among them, imposing a significant burden on child and the family. On account of multiple underlying factors, both diagnosis and subsequent management of constipation in children with ASD are much more challenging as compared to managing constipation in 'neurotypical' children. Associated higher rate of presentation to the hospital emergency and subsequent hospital admission rates add to the burden. Hence, there is a need for recognizing constipation as a problem in children with ASD. This review summarizes optimization of its management by adopting a multidisciplinary holistic approach to achieve good outcomes and enhance the quality of life for the child and the family.
35189816|a|BACKGROUND: Swi6 acts as a transcription factor in budding yeast, functioning in two different heterodimeric complexes, SBF and MBF, that activate the expression of distinct but overlapping sets of genes. Swi6 undergoes regulated changes in nucleocytoplasmic localization throughout the cell cycle that correlate with changes in gene expression. This study investigates how nucleocytoplasmic transport by multiple transport factors may influence specific Swi6 activities. RESULTS: Here we show that the exportin Crm1 is important for Swi6 nuclear export and activity. Loss of a putative Crm1 NES or inhibition of Crm1 activity results in changes in nucleocytoplasmic Swi6 localization. Alteration of the Crm1 NES in Swi6 results in decreased MBF-mediated gene expression, but does not affect SBF reporter expression, suggesting that export of Swi6 by Crm1 regulates a subset of Swi6 transcription activation activity. Finally, alteration of the putative Crm1 NES in Swi6 results in cells that are larger than wild type, and this increase in cell size is exacerbated by deletion of Msn5. CONCLUSIONS: These data provide evidence that Swi6 has at least two different exportins, Crm1 and Msn5, each of which interacts with a distinct nuclear export signal. We identify a putative nuclear export signal for Crm1 within Swi6, and observe that export by Crm1 or Msn5 independently influences Swi6-regulated expression of a different subset of Swi6-controlled genes. These findings provide new insights into the complex regulation of Swi6 transcription activation activity and the role of nucleocytoplasmic shuttling in regulated gene expression.
35189784|a|OBJECTIVES: In this paper, a novel approach is presented for selecting psychological treatment levels for older adults with borderline personality disorder (BPD). BPD tends to be a lifelong disorder persisting into old age, with a specific presentation of BPD symptoms in later life, which is illustrated by three different clinical cases. METHODS: Recently, a clinical staging and health management model for BPD was presented to assist in selecting appropriate treatment approaches. RESULTS: We combined this clinical staging model for BPD across the lifespan with psychotherapeutic treatment levels for older adults with personality disorders. CONCLUSIONS: This may allow for a more accurate treatment selection for older adults with BPD and was applied to the three clinical cases. Finally, implications for research and clinical practice are discussed.
35188556|a|Importance: Suicide is the second leading cause of death among youths worldwide, but no available means exist to identify the risk of suicide in this population. Objective: To assess whether genome-wide polygenic scores for psychiatric and common traits are associated with the risk of suicide among preadolescent children and to investigate whether and to what extent the interaction between early life stress (a major environmental risk factor) and polygenic factors is associated with suicidal thoughts and behaviors among youths. Design, Setting, and Participants: This cohort study analyzed the genotype-phenotype data of 11 869 preadolescent children aged 9 to 10 years from the Adolescent Brain and Cognitive Development study. Data were collected from September 1, 2016, to October 21, 2018, and analyzed from August 1, 2020, to January 3, 2021. Using machine learning approaches, genome-wide polygenic scores of 24 complex traits were estimated to investigate their phenome-wide associations and utility for assessing risk of suicidal thoughts and behaviors (suicidal ideation [active, passive, and overall] and suicide attempt). Main Outcomes and Measures: Genome-wide polygenic scores were used to measure 24 traits, including psychiatric disorders, cognitive capacity, and personality and psychological characteristics. The Child Behavior Checklist was used to measure early life stress, and the Family Environment Scale was used to assess family environment. Suicidal ideation and suicide attempts were derived from the computerized version of the Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia. Results: Among 11 869 preadolescent children in the US, complete data for phenotypic outcomes, genotypes, and covariates were available for 7140 participants in the multiethnic cohort (mean [SD] age, 9.9 [0.6] years; 3588 girls [50.3%]), including 925 participants with suicidal ideation and 63 participants with suicide attempts. Among those 7140 participants, 729 had African ancestry (self-reported race or ethnicity: 569 Black, 71 Hispanic, and 89 other), 276 had admixed American ancestry (self-reported race or ethnicity: 265 Hispanic, 3 White, and 8 other), 150 had East Asian ancestry (self-reported race or ethnicity: 67 Asian, 18 Hispanic, and 65 other), 5718 had European ancestry (self-reported race or ethnicity: 7 Asian, 39 Black, 1142 Hispanic, 3934 White, and 596 other), and 267 had other ancestries (self-reported race or ethnicity: 70 Asian, 13 Black, 126 Hispanic, 48 White, and 10 other). Three genome-wide polygenic scores were significantly associated (false discovery rate P < .05) with suicidal thoughts and behaviors among all participants: attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (odds ratio [OR], 1.12; 95% CI, 1.05-1.21; P = .001), schizophrenia (OR, 1.50; 95% CI, 1.17-1.93; P = .002), and general happiness (OR, 0.89; 95% CI, 0.83-0.96; P = .002). In the analysis including only children with European ancestry, 3 additional genome-wide polygenic scores with false discovery rate significance were associated with suicidal thoughts and behaviors: autism spectrum disorder (OR, 1.18; 95% CI, 1.06-1.31; P = .002), major depressive disorder (OR, 1.12; 95% CI, 1.04-1.21; P = .003), and posttraumatic stress disorder (OR, 1.12; 95% CI, 1.04-1.21; P = .004). A significant interaction between genome-wide polygenic scores and environment was found, with genetic risk factors for autism spectrum disorder and the level of early life stress associated with increases in the risk of overall suicidal ideation and overall suicidal thoughts and behaviors (OR, 1.20; 95% CI, 1.07-1.35; P = .002). A machine learning model using multitrait genome-wide polygenic scores and additional self-reported questionnaire data (Child Behavior Checklist and Family Environment Scale) produced a moderately accurate estimate of overall suicidal thoughts and behaviors (area under the receiver operating characteristic curve [AUROC], 0.77; 95% CI, 0.73-0.81; accuracy, 0.67) and suicidal ideation (AUROC, 0.76; 95% CI, 0.72-0.80; accuracy, 0.66) among children with European ancestry only. Among all children in the multiethnic cohort, the integrated model also outperformed the baseline model in estimating the risk of overall suicidal thoughts and behaviors (AUROC, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.67-0.75; accuracy, 0.68) and suicidal ideation (AUROC, 0.75; 95% CI, 0.71-0.78; accuracy, 0.67). Conclusions and Relevance: In this cohort study of preadolescent youths in the US, higher genome-wide polygenic scores for psychiatric disorders, such as attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism spectrum disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, and schizophrenia, were significantly associated with a greater risk of suicidal ideation and suicide attempt. The findings and quantitative models from this study may help to identify children with a high risk of suicide, potentially assisting with early screening, intervention, and prevention.
35188106|a|JUSTIFICATION: Global developmental delay (GDD) is a relatively common neurodevelopmental disorder, however, paucity of published literature and absence of uniform guidelines increases the complexity of clinical management of this condition. Hence, there is a need of practical guidelines for the pediatrician on the diagnosis and management of GDD, summarizing the available evidence, and filling in the gaps in existing knowledge and practices. PROCESS: Seven subcommittees of subject experts and members of Indian Academy of Pediatrics (IAP) chapter of neurodevelopmental Pediatrics and Neurology chapter, comprising of writing and expert group from among members of Indian Academy of Pediatrics and its chapters of Neurology, Neurodevelopment Pediatrics and Growth Development and Behavioral Pediatrics were constituted, who reviewed literature, developed key questions and prepared the first draft on guidelines after multiple rounds of discussion. The guidelines were then discussed by the whole group in an online meeting. The points of contention were discussed and a general consensus was arrived at, after which final guidelines were drafted by the writing group and approved by all contributors. The guidelines were then approved by the Executive Board of Indian Academy of Pediatrics (IAP). GUIDELINES: GDD is defined as significant delay (at least 2 standard deviations below the mean with standardized developmental tests) in at least two developmental domains in children under 5 years of age; however, children whose delay can be explained primarily by motor issues or severe uncorrected visual/hearing impairment are excluded. Severity of GDD can be classified as mild, moderate, severe and profound on adaptive functioning. For all children, in addition to routine surveillance, developmental screening using standardized tools should be done at 9-12 months,18-24 months, and at school entry; whereas, for high risk infants, it should be done 6-monthly till 24 months and yearly till 5 years of age; in addition to once at school entry. All children, especially those diagnosed with GDD, should be screened for ASD at 18-24 months, and if screen negative, again at 3 years of age. It is recommended that investigations should always follow a careful history and examination to plan targeted testing and, vision and hearing screening should be done in all cases prior to standardized tests of development. Neuroimaging, preferably magnetic resonance imaging of the brain, should be obtained when specific clinical indicators are present. Biochemical and metabolic investigations should be targeted towards identifying treatable conditions and genetic tests are recommended in presence of clinical suspicion of a genetic syndrome and/or in the absence of a clear etiology. Multidisciplinary intervention should be initiated soon after the delay is recognized even before a formal diagnosis is made, and early intervention for high risk infants should start in the nursery with developmentally supportive care. Detailed structured counselling of family regarding the diagnosis, etiology, comorbidities, investigations, management, prognosis and follow-up is recommended. Regular targeted follow-up should be done, preferably in consultation with a team of experts led by a developmental pediatrician/ pediatric neurologist.
35187994|a|BACKGROUND: Dysmetria in children with autism spectrum disorders is considered depend on executive dysfunctions. To explore the impact of inhibitory control and working memory on oculomotor performance in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), we used the memory guided saccade (MGS) paradigm. METHOD: We enrolled in our study a group of 26 children with ASD and in a group of 26 children age-, sex-, and IQ-matched of with typically development, using only one single delay period and one single stimulus amplitude. We recorded with a video eye-tracker system- the latency and the accuracy of the MGS as well as the number of anticipatory saccades during the MGS paradigm. RESULTS: Children with ASD displayed significant increased latency (p < .01), decreased amplitude of memory guided saccades (p < .01) and an elevated number of anticipatory saccades (p < .003), when compared to age-, sex-, IQ- matched children with typical development. CONCLUSION: These abnormalities may underline the executive dysfunctions frequently reported in ASD: the increased latency and the decreased amplitude of memory guides saccades may be related to planning and working memory impairments; the increased number of anticipatory saccades may be linked to a deficit in inhibitory control.
35187674|a|In their comprehensive and articulate paper on the Transdiagnostic Revolution in Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Astle, Holmes, Kievit and Gathercole (2021) 'consider how well current classifications of neurodevelopmental disorders serve our understanding'. They examine the lack of mapping between clinical diagnoses such as ADHD or autism and research data at other levels of explanation, including genetics, neural structure and function, and cognition. The authors come to the conclusion that, if our goal is to explain variability and complexity, understand mechanisms and guide support decisions, 'diagnostic taxonomies that classify individuals in terms of discrete categories are ill-suited'. In this commentary, I explore alignment between their account of the transdiagnostic revolution and the neurodiversity paradigm and identify how transdiagnostic methods may promote neurodiversity-affirmative research and practice.
35187652|a|BACKGROUND: Uncovering the neural mechanisms that underlie symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) requires studying brain development prior to the emergence of behavioural difficulties. One new approach to this is prospective studies of infants with an elevated likelihood of developing ADHD. METHODS: We used a prospective design to examine an oscillatory electroencephalography profile that has been widely studied in both children and adults with ADHD - the balance between lower and higher frequencies operationalised as the theta-beta ratio (TBR). In the present study, we examined TBR in 136 10-month-old infants (72 male and 64 female) with/without an elevated likelihood of developing ADHD and/or a comparison disorder (Autism Spectrum Disorder; ASD). RESULTS: Infants with a first-degree relative with ADHD demonstrated lower TBR than infants without a first-degree relative with ADHD. Further, lower TBR at 10 months was positively associated with temperament dimensions conceptually related to ADHD at 2 years. TBR was not altered in infants with a family history of ASD. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first demonstration that alterations in TBR are present prior to behavioural symptoms of ADHD. However, these alterations manifest differently than those sometimes observed in older children with an ADHD diagnosis. Importantly, altered TBR was not seen in infants at elevated likelihood of developing ASD, suggesting a degree of specificity to ADHD. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that there are brain changes associated with a family history of ADHD observable in the first year of life.
35187567|a|A significant percentage of music therapists actively provides services to children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). There is an absence, however, of a widely accepted clinical instrument, specific to music therapy work with this population, that demonstrates psychometric validation. Establishing commonality in assessing and documenting this particular work within the field would be pivotal to furthering the efforts which have established music therapy as evidenced-based practice. A study was conducted to explore the convergent validity between the Musical Emotion Assessment Rating Scale (MEARS), which is Scale I of the Individual Music-Centered Assessment Profile of the Neurodevelopmental Disorders (IMCAP-ND) assessment tool, with the Social Affect Scale domains and item variables of the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS). The data revealed statistical significance, thus supporting convergent validity with several specific MEARS scores when compared with the ADOS Social Affect domain score. The current investigation supports the IMCAP-ND's soundness as an assessment tool possessing valid and reliable psychometric properties. The convergent validity between MEARS and ADOS showed positive results in the area of social affect. Implications of this study are related to clinical practice and may impact how music therapists assess children with autism. Furthermore, this study contributes to the growing body of music therapy assessments that have yielded valid and reliable scores used to evaluate core features of ASD (e.g., social affect).
35187229|a|Background and Objectives: Isolated paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKD) is mainly caused by PRRT2 variants and TMEM151A variants. Patients with proximal 16p11.2 microdeletion (16p11.2MD) (including PRRT2) often have neurodevelopmental phenotypes, whereas a few patients have PKD. Here, we aimed to identify 16p11.2MD in patients with PKD and describe the related phenotypes. Methods: Whole-exome sequencing and bioinformatics analysis of copy number variant (CNV) were performed in patients with PKD carrying neither PRRT2 nor TMEM151A variant. Quantitative PCR and low-coverage whole-genome sequencing verified the CNV. Results: We identified 9 sporadic patients with PKD and 16p11.2MD (~535 kb), accounting for 9.6% (9/94) of our patients. Together with 9 previously reported patients with PKD and 16p11.2MD, we found that 16p11.2MD was de novo in 11 of 12 tested patients and inherited from a parent in the other patient. And 80% (12/15) of these patients had a mild language delay, 64.3% (9/14) had compromised learning ability, 42.9% (6/14) had a mild motor delay, and 50% (6/12) had abnormal neuroimaging findings. No severe autism disorders were observed. Discussion: Mild developmental problems may be overlooked. A detailed inquiry of developmental history and CNV testing are necessary to distinguish patients with 16p11.2MD from isolated PKD.
35186195|a|
35186135|a|This study aimed to reveal and investigate mothers' experiences of students with severe disabilities regarding learning in distance education in Lima-Peru. This is a phenomenological study focused on understanding the world of mothers regarding the education of their children with severe disabilities. Their discourse focused on four categories: being the mother of a child with severe disability, pandemic category, virtual education, and family prospects. The participants were three mothers of children with Down Syndrome, Autism Spectrum Disorder, and Cerebral Palsy. An in-depth interview structured in 26 questions was used, applied face to face. With distance education, the mothers consider that their children's abilities and skills have assumed a leading role, developed creativity, and employed various strategies to comply with school activities. In addition, it also strengthened their family ties despite the pandemic.
35186133|a|Sexual behavior is influenced by social and communication deficits in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and is a serious challenge for parents who lack effective strategies for providing sexual education to their children with ASD. The purpose of this study was to explore Iranian parents' experiences of psychological distress in dealing with the sexual behaviors of their children with ASD. This qualitative study was designed following the conventional content analysis approach. Semi-structured and in-depth interviews were conducted with 27 parents of children with ASD aged 8-34 years. All interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim. The data were collected through purposeful sampling and continued until data saturation. The worries theme was extracted from data interpretation using qualitative content analysis, and this theme entailed four subthemes: 1) sexual vulnerability, 2) unintended social consequences, 3) psychological suffering, and 4) confusion about the future of a child's sex life. This study emphasized the importance of paying attention to parents' concerns about the sexual behaviors of children with ASD. Parents' psychological distress is a major obstacle to proper coping with sexual behaviors, and using coping strategies may help reduce psychological distress in parents of children with ASD. Therefore, it is necessary to design, implement, and evaluate culture-appropriate educational programs to address parents' concerns regarding the sexual health of a child with autism.
35185714|a|Autistic individuals without intellectual disabilities are sometimes not diagnosed until adolescence/adulthood. Due to increased risk of co-occurring mental health problems, these individuals may initially be referred to general, mental health services and not always be identified as autistic; some may be misdiagnosed with personality disorder (PD) prior to identification of autism. To explore possible mechanisms in misdiagnosis of autism, we report on the case of a young man with severe, non-suicidal self-injury (NSSI) and attention deficit disorder (ADD) who had been diagnosed with and treated for borderline PD prior to being diagnosed with autism. Following reassessment by mental health clinicians with experience of working with autistic individuals, the patient was diagnosed with autism, ADD, and depression-but not PD. Experiences from this case suggest that presence of co-occurring NSSI, depression, and ADD, as well as lack of comprehensive assessment and lack of autism knowledge in general mental health services, may contribute to risk that autism is misdiagnosed as PD. These findings highlight the need for autism expertise in general mental health services to facilitate appropriate diagnosis for autistic individuals who encounter these services, as well as the importance of undertaking comprehensive assessments.
35185658|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder that is characterized by impairments in social interaction and restricted/repetitive behaviors. The neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) through GABAA receptor signaling in the immature brain plays a key role in the development of neuronal circuits. Excitatory/inhibitory imbalance in the mature brain has been investigated as a pathophysiological mechanism of ASD. However, whether and how disturbances of GABA signaling in embryos that are caused by GABAA receptor inhibitors cause ASD-like pathophysiology are poorly understood. The present study examined whether exposure to the GABAA receptor antagonist picrotoxin causes ASD-like pathophysiology in offspring by conducting behavioral tests from the juvenile period to adulthood and performing gene expression analyses in mature mouse brains. Here, we found that male mice that were prenatally exposed to picrotoxin exhibited a reduction of active interaction time in the social interaction test in both adolescence and adulthood. The gene expression analyses showed that picrotoxin-exposed male mice exhibited a significant increase in the gene expression of odorant receptors. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis showed a strong correlation between social interaction and enrichment of the "odorant binding" pathway gene module. Our findings suggest that exposure to a GABAA receptor inhibitor during the embryonic period induces ASD-like behavior, and impairments in odorant function may contribute to social deficits in offspring.
35185642|a|Introduction: Accumulating evidence has shown that maternal metabolic conditions, such as pre-pregnancy overweight, diabetes mellitus, and hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (HDP) are potential risk factors of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, it remains unclear how these maternal conditions lead to neurodevelopmental outcomes in the offspring, including autistic symptoms. Leptin, an adipokine that has pro-inflammatory effects and affects fetal neurodevelopment, is a candidate mediator of the association between maternal metabolic factors and an increased risk of ASD. However, whether prenatal exposure to leptin mediates the association between maternal metabolic conditions and autistic symptoms in children has not been investigated yet. Methods: This study investigated the associations between mothers' metabolic conditions (pre-pregnancy overweight, diabetes mellitus during or before pregnancy, and HDP), leptin concentrations in umbilical cord serum, and autistic symptoms among 762 children from an ongoing cohort study, using generalized structural equation modeling. We used the Social Responsive Scale, Second Edition (SRS-2) at 8-9 years old to calculate total T-scores. Additionally, we used the T-scores for two subdomains: Social Communication and Interaction (SCI) and Restricted Interests and Repetitive Behavior (RRB). Results: Umbilical cord leptin levels were associated with pre-pregnancy overweight [coefficient = 1.297, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.081-1.556, p = 0.005] and diabetes mellitus (coefficient = 1.574, 95% CI 1.206-2.055, p = 0.001). Furthermore, leptin levels were significantly associated with SRS-2 total T-scores (coefficient = 1.002, 95% CI 1.000-1.004, p = 0.023), SCI scores (coefficient = 1.002, 95% CI 1.000-1.004, p = 0.020), and RRB scores (coefficient = 1.001, 95% CI 1.000-1.003, p = 0.044) in children. Associations between maternal metabolic factors and autistic symptoms were not significant. Discussion: The present study uncovered an association between cord leptin levels and autistic symptoms in children, while maternal metabolic conditions did not have an evident direct influence on the outcome. These results imply that prenatal pro-inflammatory environments affected by maternal metabolic conditions may contribute to the development of autistic symptoms in children. The findings warrant further investigation into the role of leptin in the development of autistic symptoms.
35185636|a|Objectives: Autism, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and tic disorder (Tourette syndrome; TS) are neurodevelopmental conditions that frequently co-occur and impact psychological, social, and emotional processes. Increased likelihood of chronic physical symptoms, including fatigue and pain, are also recognized. The expression of joint hypermobility, reflecting a constitutional variant in connective tissue, predicts susceptibility to psychological symptoms alongside recognized physical symptoms. Here, we tested for increased prevalence of joint hypermobility, autonomic dysfunction, and musculoskeletal symptoms in 109 adults with neurodevelopmental condition diagnoses. Methods: Rates of generalized joint hypermobility (GJH, henceforth hypermobility) in adults with a formal diagnosis of neurodevelopmental conditions (henceforth neurodivergent group, n = 109) were compared to those in the general population in UK. Levels of orthostatic intolerance and musculoskeletal symptoms were compared to a separate comparison group (n = 57). Age specific cut-offs for GJH were possible to determine in the neurodivergent and comparison group only. Results: The neurodivergent group manifested elevated prevalence of hypermobility (51%) compared to the general population rate of 20% and a comparison population (17.5%). Using a more stringent age specific cut-off, in the neurodivergent group this prevalence was 28.4%, more than double than the comparison group (12.5%). Odds ratio for presence of hypermobility in neurodivergent group, compared to the general population was 4.51 (95% CI 2.17-9.37), with greater odds in females than males. Using age specific cut-off, the odds ratio for GJH in neurodivergent group, compared to the comparison group, was 2.84 (95% CI 1.16-6.94). Neurodivergent participants reported significantly more symptoms of orthostatic intolerance and musculoskeletal skeletal pain than the comparison group. The number of hypermobile joints was found to mediate the relationship between neurodivergence and symptoms of both dysautonomia and pain. Conclusions: In neurodivergent adults, there is a strong link between the expression of joint hypermobility, dysautonomia, and pain, more so than in the comparison group. Moreover, joint hypermobility mediates the link between neurodivergence and symptoms of dysautonomia and pain. Increased awareness and understanding of this association may enhance the management of core symptoms and allied difficulties in neurodivergent people, including co-occurring physical symptoms, and guide service delivery in the future.
35185631|a|The interest elicited by the large microbial population colonizing the human gut has ancient origins and has gone through a long evolution during history. However, it is only in the last decades that the introduction of high-throughput technologies has allowed to broaden this research field and to disentangle the numerous implications that gut microbiota has in health and disease. This comprehensive ecosystem, constituted mainly by bacteria but also by fungi, parasites, and viruses, is proven to be involved in several physiological and pathological processes that transcend the intestinal homeostasis and are deeply intertwined with apparently unrelated body systems, such as the immune and the nervous ones. In this regard, a novel speculation is the relationship between the intestinal microbial flora and the pathogenesis of some neurological and neurodevelopmental disorders, including the clinical entities defined under the umbrella term of autism spectrum disorders. The bidirectional interplay has led researchers to coin the term gut-brain-immune system axis, subverting the theory of the brain as an immune-privileged site and underscoring the importance of this reciprocal influence already from fetal life and especially during the pre- and post-natal neurodevelopmental process. This revolutionary theory has also unveiled the possibility to modify the gut microbiota as a way to treat and even to prevent different kinds of pathologies. In this sense, some attempts have been made, ranging from probiotic administration to fecal microbiota transplantation, with promising results that need further elaboration. This state-of-art report will describe the main aspects regarding the human gut microbiome and its specific role in the pathogenesis of autism and its related disorders, with a final discussion on the therapeutic and preventive strategies aiming at creating a healthy intestinal microbial environment, as well as their safety and ethical implications.
35185478|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is one of the most frequently diagnosed neurodevelopmental disorders, characterized among others by impairments in social interactions and repetitive behavior. According to one of the leading hypotheses about its origin, ASD is caused by the imbalance of excitatory and inhibitory circuit activity. ASD-related morphological and functional changes can be observed in several brain regions i.e., in the prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus. It is well-established that prenatal valproic-acid (VPA) exposure of rats on day 12.5 leads to neurodevelopmental alterations with autism-like clinical and behavioral symptoms. The aim of this study was to investigate potential changes in the excitability of neuronal networks and individual neurons of the hippocampus elicited by prenatal VPA treatment. As there are marked sex differences in ASD, offspring of both sexes were systematically tested, using two different age groups, to elucidate eventual differences in neurodevelopment after VPA treatment. Excitatory connections and long-term synaptic plasticity as well as intrinsic excitability of CA1 pyramidal cells were examined. Pregnant female Wistar rats received saline or 500 mg/kg VPA i. p. on gestation day 12.5. Brain slices of 6-week-old and 3-month-old offspring were investigated using extra- and intracellular electrophysiological techniques. Field potential- and whole-cell patch clamp recordings were carried out to measure network excitability and single cell activity in the CA1 region hippocampus. Enhanced excitability of hippocampal networks was detected in the 6-week-old VPA-treated male rats; however, this change could not be observed in 3-month-old males. Intrinsic excitability of single neurons, however, was increased in 3-month-old males. In 6-week-old treated females, the most prominent effect of VPA was an increase in voltage sag, to a similar degree to the neurons of the older age group. In 3-month-old females, a network excitability increase could be demonstrated, in a lesser degree than in younger males. It can be concluded, that VPA treatment had diverse effects on hippocampal excitability depending on the sex and the age of the animals. We found that certain alterations manifested in 6-week-old rats were compensated later, on the other hand, other changes persisted until the age of 3 months.
35185468|a|Accurate and precise regulation of gene expression is necessary to ensure proper brain development and plasticity across the lifespan. As an ATP-dependent chromatin-remodeling complex, the BAF (Brg1 Associated Factor) complex can alter histone-DNA interactions, facilitating dynamic changes in gene expression by controlling DNA accessibility to the transcriptional machinery. Mutations in 12 of the potential 29 subunit genes that compose the BAF nucleosome remodeling complex have been identified in several developmental disorders including Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and intellectual disability. A novel, neuronal version of BAF (nBAF) has emerged as promising candidate in the development of ASD as its expression is tied to neuron differentiation and it's hypothesized to coordinate expression of synaptic genes across brain development. Recently, mutations in BAF53B, one of the neuron specific subunits of the nBAF complex, have been identified in patients with ASD and Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy-76 (DEE76), indicating BAF53B is essential for proper brain development. Recent work in cultured neurons derived from patients with BAF53B mutations suggests links between loss of nBAF function and neuronal dendritic spine formation. Deletion of one or both copies of mouse Baf53b disrupts dendritic spine development, alters actin dynamics and results in fewer synapses in vitro. In the mouse, heterozygous loss of Baf53b severely impacts synaptic plasticity and long-term memory that is reversible with reintroduction of Baf53b or manipulations of the synaptic plasticity machinery. Furthermore, surviving Baf53b-null mice display ASD-related behaviors, including social impairments and repetitive behaviors. This review summarizes the emerging evidence linking deleterious variants of BAF53B identified in human neurodevelopmental disorders to abnormal transcriptional regulation that produces aberrant synapse development and behavior.
35185454|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is one common developmental disorder with great variations in symptoms and severity, making the diagnosis of ASD a challenging task. Existing deep learning models using brain connectivity features to classify ASD still suffer from degraded performance for multi-center data due to limited feature representation ability and insufficient interpretability. Given that Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) has demonstrated superiority in learning discriminative representations of brain connectivity networks, in this paper, we propose an invertible dynamic GCN model to identify ASD and investigate the alterations of connectivity patterns associated with the disease. In order to select explainable features from the model, invertible blocks are introduced in the whole network, and we are able to reconstruct the input dynamic features from the network's output. A pre-screening of connectivity features is adopted to reduce the redundancy of the input information, and a fully-connected layer is added to perform classification. The experimental results on 867 subjects show that our proposed method achieves superior disease classification performance. It provides an interpretable deep learning model for brain connectivity analysis and is of great potential in studying brain-related disorders.
35185452|a|Given the significance of validating reliable tests for the early detection of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), this systematic review aims to summarize available evidence of neuroimaging and neurophysiological changes in high-risk infants to improve ASD early diagnosis. We included peer-reviewed, primary research in English published before May 21, 2021, involving the use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), electroencephalogram (EEG), or functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) in children with high risk for ASD under 24 months of age. The main exclusion criteria includes diagnosis of a genetic disorder and gestation age of less the 36 weeks. Online research was performed on PubMed, Web of Science, PsycINFO, and CINAHL. Article selection was conducted by two reviewers to minimize bias. This research was funded by Massachusetts General Hospital Sundry funding. IRB approval was not submitted as it was deemed unnecessary. We included 75 primary research articles. Studies showed that high-risk infants had divergent developmental trajectories for fractional anisotropy and regional brain volumes, increased CSF volume, and global connectivity abnormalities on MRI, decreased sensitivity for familiar faces, atypical lateralization during facial and auditory processing, and different spectral powers across multiple band frequencies on EEG, and distinct developmental trajectories in functional connectivity and regional oxyhemoglobin concentrations in fNIRS. These findings in infants were found to be correlated with the core ASD symptoms and diagnosis at toddler age. Despite the lack of quantitative analysis of the research database, neuroimaging and electrophysiological biomarkers have promising value for the screening of ASD as early as infancy with high accuracy, which warrants further investigation.
35184775|a|
35184246|a|Autistic and non-autistic adults completed a visual perspective taking (VPT) task, reporting an object's location from an actor's perspective, or their own. On half the trials the actor looked at and reached for the object, and on half did not. Accuracy and reaction time were measured. In Experiment 1, both groups (N = 34, mean age = 24 years) responded slower when reporting the actor's perspective, with no group differences in this effect. Experiment 2 included "other" VPT trials only. Both groups (N = 30, mean age = 25 years) showed sensitivity to the actor's behaviour, more accurately reporting his perspective when he acted upon the object. No group differences were observed. In contrast to developmental studies, these experiments suggest similar VPT abilities in autistic and non-autistic adults.
35184077|a|PURPOSE: After the COVID-19 pandemic, several randomized controlled trials came to a halt; however, we chose to reinvent our study and shifted to a home-based, telehealth intervention delivery format to support children with autism spectrum disorder and their families. Children with autism spectrum disorder have social communication impairments as well as perceptuomotor and cognitive comorbidities. Continued access to care is crucial for their long-term development. METHODS: We created a general movement intervention to target strength, endurance, executive functioning, and social skills through goal-directed games and activities delivered using a telehealth intervention model. FINDINGS: Our family-centered approach allowed for collaboration between trainers and caregivers and made it easy for families to replicate training activities at home. CONCLUSIONS: While more studies comparing telehealth and face-to-face interventions are needed, we encourage researchers and clinicians to consider family-centered telehealth as a valid and feasible intervention delivery method, to increase the likelihood of carryover of skills into the daily lives of children and ultimately enhance their long-term development.
35183255|a|BACKGROUND: Mild encephalitis/encephalopathy with reversible splenial lesion is a clinical-radiological entity found to occur in the setting of an acute systemic inflammatory state with isolated lesions of the splenium of the corpus callosum and mild encephalopathy. Mild encephalitis/encephalopathy with reversible splenial lesion is commonly found to occur in children in the setting of viral infections. It has rarely been associated with Mycoplasma pneumoniae in the United States, unlike in Eastern and Southern Asia where this is much more prominent. CASE PRESENTATIONS: A 5-year-old African-American boy with autism spectrum disorder presented to our emergency department with acute onset intractable vomiting, diarrhea, and abnormal tensing movements for 2 days, following a 6-day period of fatigue, fever, and spastic abdominal pain. Emergent work-up in our department ruled out acute gastrointestinal pathologies. Given the high fevers and encephalopathy, there was concern for meningitis or encephalitis. His cerebrospinal fluid profile was concerning for viral meningitis, however extensive infectious workup was negative. Magnetic resonance imaging of his brain demonstrated a T2 fluid-attenuated inversion recovery sequence hyperintensity in the splenium of the corpus callosum, read as postictal changes by radiology. Continuous video electroencephalography demonstrated mild diffuse encephalopathy without electrographic correlate of his tensing episodes. He was determined to have mild encephalitis/encephalopathy with a reversible splenial lesion in the setting of a postinfectious etiology. He was treated with a single pulse-dose of intravenous methylprednisolone, following which he gradually returned to his baseline the next day. Repeat magnetic resonance imaging and cerebrospinal fluid evaluation demonstrated resolution of previous findings. He was ultimately diagnosed with an acute M. pneumoniae infection, which was determined to be the etiology of his mild encephalitis/encephalopathy with a reversible splenial lesion. CONCLUSIONS: The presentation of mild encephalitis/encephalopathy with a reversible splenial lesion is often nonspecific, with behavioral symptoms ranging from irritability to disturbances in consciousness. Its prevalence is higher in the pediatric population, and is thought to be more of an infection-associated encephalopathy syndrome in this group. The infections are typically viral, more so than bacterial. M. pneumoniae, a small, atypical bacterium lacking a peptidoglycan cell wall, is a common respiratory tract pathogen found in children. Despite infection being so rampant in the pediatric community, very few cases of M. pneumoniae-associated mild encephalitis/encephalopathy with a reversible splenial lesion in the United States have been reported. In Eastern and Southern Asian countries, however, M. pneumoniae-associated mild encephalitis/encephalopathy with a reversible splenial lesion is much more commonly reported. This difference may potentially lie in the prevalence of macrolide-resistant M. pneumoniae, which is significantly higher in Asian countries given more liberal antibiotic use in M. pneumoniae infections. Infections with macrolide-resistant M. pneumoniae are reportedly greater in severity and duration. This amplified state may suggest a correlation between intensity of inflammatory response and the development of mild encephalitis/encephalopathy with a reversible splenial lesion. Given the rarity of M. pneumoniae-associated mild encephalitis/encephalopathy with a reversible splenial lesion in the United States, much remains unknown regarding predilection and optimum treatment strategy. As rates of macrolide-resistant M. pneumoniae begin to rise in the United States, maintaining a high level of suspicion remains key in better understanding this unique phenomenon.
35183250|a|BACKGROUND: A significant proportion of variation in likelihood of neurodevelopmental conditions (NDCs) has been attributed to nonshared environmental (NSE) factors, although it remains unclear which NSE factors pose specific risks for certain NDCs. METHODS: A monozygotic co-twin design was applied in a sample of 224 twins (mean age = 17.70 years, SD = 6.28) controlling for confounders such as genes and shared environment. Generalized estimating equation models were fitted, using perinatal and postnatal indications of NSEs as exposure, operationalized both as separate risk factors and as cumulative risk loads. Categorical and dimensional operationalizations of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), intellectual disability and other NDCs were used as outcomes. RESULTS: Birth weight discordance was associated with dimensional autism and ADHD for the smaller twin, and medication during infancy was associated with dimensional autism. Among postnatal factors scarlet fever during early childhood was associated with lower IQ. Especially autism was associated with a greater cumulative perinatal or postnatal risk load. LIMITATIONS: When exploring the associations between each condition and specific NSEs the risk of being statistically underpowered increases. Hence, we limit the reported findings on specific indicators of NSEs to trait levels and present descriptive data for categorical NDCs. CONCLUSIONS: The findings support previous research by indicating an association between exposure to perinatal and postnatal risks and subsequent NDCs within twin pairs and suggest that autism may be especially linked to accumulative early environmental risks. The findings are potentially important for developmental outcomes prognoses and may inform targeted prevention and early interventions.
35183220|a|BACKGROUND: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are a group of heterogeneous conditions, which include mainly intellectual disability, developmental delay (DD) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), among others. These diseases are highly heterogeneous and both genetic and environmental factors play an important role in many of them. The introduction of next generation sequencing (NGS) has lead to the detection of genetic variants in several genetic diseases. The main aim of this report is to discuss the impact and advantages of the implementation of NGS in the diagnosis of NDDs. Herein, we report diagnostic yields of applying whole exome sequencing in 87 families affected by NDDs and additional data of whole genome sequencing (WGS) from 12 of these families. RESULTS: The use of NGS technologies allowed identifying the causative gene alteration in approximately 36% (31/87) of the families. Among them, de novo mutation represented the most common cause of genetic alteration found in 48% (15/31) of the patients with diagnostic mutations. The majority of variants were located in known neurodevelopmental disorders genes. Nevertheless, some of the diagnoses were made after the use of GeneMatcher tools which allow the identification of additional patients carrying mutations in THOC2, SETD1B and CHD9 genes. Finally the use of WGS only allowed the identification of disease causing variants in 8% (1/12) of the patients in which previous WES failed to identify a genetic aetiology. CONCLUSION: NGS is more powerful in identifying causative pathogenic variant than conventional algorithms based on chromosomal microarray as first-tier test. Our results reinforce the implementation of NGS as a first-test in genetic diagnosis of NDDs.
35183218|a|To diagnose autism spectrum disorder (ASD), researchers have sought biomarkers whose alterations correlate with the susceptibility to ASD. However, biomarkers closely related to the pathophysiology of ASD are lacking. Even though excitation/inhibition (E/I) imbalance has been suggested as an underlying mechanism of ASD, few studies have investigated the actual ratio of glutamate (Glu) to gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) concentration in vivo. Moreover, there are controversies in the directions of E/I ratio alterations even in extensively studied ASD animal models. Here, using proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS) at 9.4T, we found significant differences in the levels of different metabolites or their ratios in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus of Cntnap2-/- mice compared to their wild-type littermates. The Glu/GABA ratio, N-acetylaspartate (NAA)/total creatine (tCr) ratio, and tCr level in the prefrontal cortex were significantly different in Cntnap2-/- mice compared to those in wild-type mice, and they significantly correlated with the sociability of mice. Moreover, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses indicated high specificity and selectivity of these metabolites in discriminating genotypes. These results suggest that the lowered Glu/GABA ratio in the prefrontal cortex along with the changes in the other metabolites might contribute to the social behavior deficit in Cntnap2-/- mice. Our results also demonstrate the utility of 1H-MRS in investigating the underlying mechanisms or the diagnosis of ASD.
35183033|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by constellation of impaired behaviors that include deficits in social interaction/communication and the presence of restricted/repetitive behavioral patterns. Both genetic component and environmental factors are thought to play a key role in the initiation and progression of ASD. Several environmental factors such as heavy metals and plasticizers are known to affect the progression of ASD. One of the most common pollutants in the environment today is di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP). DEHP is utilized as a plasticizer in several household and office materials which range from medical devices to plastic toys. Children usually get exposed to DEHP at an early age through use of plastic toys and other plastic materials. Nuclear factor erythroid 2 (NFE2)-relatedfactor-2 (Nrf2) is a master redox regulator as it controls transcription of several antioxidant genes. DEHP has been reported to cause dysregulation in Nrf2 signaling in vitro/in vivo and ASD subjects also exhibit oxidant-antioxidant imbalance.Therefore, this study attempted to delineate the effect of DEHP on Nrf2 signaling in neutrophils of ASD and typically developing healthy children (TDC) in vitro. Our data display that neutrophils of ASD subjects have dysregulated Nrf2 and hemeoxygenase-1 (HO-1) expression as compared to TDC subjects. DEHP treatment leads to elevation of oxidant stress in neutrophils of both ASD and TDC subjects, however TDC neutrophils have better antioxidant response to mitigate oxidative stress. This is depicted by enhancement of Nrf2/HO-1 signaling in TDC neutrophils in response to DEHP whereas ASD neutrophils fail to do so. These results suggest that plasticizer, DEHP may cause further dysregulation in Nrf2 signaling which may promote progression of ASD.
35182905|a|BACKGROUND: Standards in education emphasize the role of metacognition in successful academic outcomes for those with and without learning challenges. Research into metamemory in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) has produced mixed outcomes, with some studies finding children with ASD to have spared metacognitive accuracy and others finding it impaired. While most research has used item-by-item metamemory judgements, the novelty of the current study was to use global judgments-of-learning (global JOLs). METHOD: Twenty-three children with and twenty without ASD were presented with two lists of action words during a learning phase and were asked to either act out the words in a self-performed task or just listen to them being read aloud in a verbal task (control condition). Typically, self-performance produces memory benefits called the enactment effect. For both tasks, children also made pre-learning and post-learning global JOLs, stating how many words they thought they would recall. RESULTS: Both groups demonstrated the enactment effect, but neither predicted its beneficial effect. Compared to controls, participants with ASD were found to be less accurate in predicting their future memory performance, specifically in the self-performed task. Both groups were comparable in terms of metacognitive monitoring. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the findings suggest that success or failure in metacognitive tasks in ASD might depend on task difficulty, and the type of metacognitive judgement used.
35182751|a|The amygdala is a core node in the social brain which exhibits structural and functional abnormalities in Autism spectrum disorder and there is evidence that the mirror neuron system (MNS) can functionally compensate for impaired emotion processing following amygdala lesions. In the current study, we employed an fMRI paradigm in 241 subjects investigating MNS and amygdala responses to observation, imagination and imitation of dynamic facial expressions and whether these differed in individuals with higher (n = 77) as opposed to lower (n = 79) autistic traits. Results indicated that individuals with higher compared to lower autistic traits showed worse recognition memory for fearful faces, smaller real-life social networks, and decreased left basolateral amygdala (BLA) responses to imitation. Additionally, functional connectivity between the left BLA and the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) as well as some other MNS regions was increased in individuals with higher autistic traits, especially during imitation of fearful expressions. The left BLA-IFG connectivity significantly moderated the autistic group differences on recognition memory for fearful faces, indicating that increased amygdala-MNS connectivity could diminish the social behavioral differences between higher and lower autistic trait groups. Overall, findings demonstrate decreased imitation-related amygdala activity in individuals with higher autistic traits in the context of increased amygdala-MNS connectivity which may functionally compensate for amygdala dysfunction and social deficits. Training targeting the MNS may capitalize on this compensatory mechanism for therapeutic benefits in Autism spectrum disorder.
35182575|a|Hearing disorders, such as abnormal speech perception, are frequently reported in autistic individuals. However, the mechanisms underlying these auditory-associated signature deficits in autism remain largely unknown. In this study, we documented significant behavioral impairments in the sound temporal rate discrimination task for rats prenatally exposed to valproic acid (VPA), a well-validated animal model for studying the pathology of autism. In parallel, there was a large-scale degradation in temporal information-processing in their primary auditory cortices (A1) at both levels of spiking outputs and synaptic inputs. Substantially increased spine density of excitatory neurons and decreased numbers of parvalbumin- and somatostatin-labeled inhibitory inter-neurons were also recorded in the A1 after VPA exposure. Given the fact that cortical temporal processing of sound is associated with speech perception in humans, these results in the animal model of VPA exposure provide insight into a possible neurological mechanism underlying auditory and language-related deficits in individuals with autism.
35182538|a|Extracellular Vesicles (EVs) are tiny vesicles used by cells as means of cellular communication, through which the function and state of a given cell can be changed. A body of evidence has suggested that EVs could be culprits in the development and progression of various types of diseases, including neurodegenerative diseases such as Multiple Sclerosis (MS) and Alzheimer's Disease (AD). Unsurprisingly, EVs have also been implicate in mood, anxiety and neurodevelopmental disorders, such as Major Depressive Disorder (MDD), anxiety disorder and Autism-Spectrum Disorder (ASD), respectively. Here, we review the state-of-art regarding the roles of EVs in the aforementioned diseases and focus on the mechanisms by which they can cause and worsen disease. Harnessing the knowledge of EVs is not only important to deliver different cargos to cells in a specific manner to treat these diseases, but also to establish reliable disease biomarkers, which will aid in the early disease diagnosis and treatment, increasing the chance of successful treatment.
35182259|a|
35182258|a|The school-age outcomes of autistic children who received early interventions (EI) remains limited. Adaptive functioning, social, peer play skills, problem behaviours, and attitudes towards school of 31 autistic children who received community-based group early start Denver model (G-ESDM) were compared to 28 age matched autistic children who received other community interventions. Similar adaptive behaviours, social skills, problem behaviours and attitudes towards school were found. Play disruption was the only dimension of play to differ; children that received community interventions demonstrated higher levels of play disruption compared to the G-ESDM group. Children had pervasive challenges in adaptive behaviour, social and play behaviour at school, irrespective of EI type. Thus, ongoing provisions are needed to support development into the school years.
35181846|a|This study evaluates the feasibility and initial efficacy of an 11-week listening comprehension intervention, Building Vocabulary and Early Reading Strategies (BVERS) that was delivered remotely to 14 elementary-aged children with autism spectrum disorder. Children were randomly assigned to one of two groups: BVERS only, or BVERS with a parent instructional component (BVERS + PC). Results indicate that the intervention was feasible to implement. All parents were satisfied with intervention implementation, and 8 of 10 stated that they were satisfied with their child's outcomes following the intervention. Results of a Wilcoxon signed-rank test showed growth in listening comprehension following the intervention, but no growth in narrative retell or vocabulary. There were no group differences in change scores from pre- to post-test.
35181754|a|The social motivation hypothesis of autism proposes that social communication symptoms in autism-spectrum disorder (ASD) stem from atypical social attention and reward networks, where dopamine acts as a crucial mediator. However, despite evidence indicating that individuals with ASD show atypical activation in extrastriatal regions while processing reward and social stimuli, no previous studies have measured extrastriatal dopamine D2/3 receptor (D2/3R) availability in ASD. Here, we investigated extrastriatal D2/3R availability in individuals with ASD and its association with ASD social communication symptoms using positron emission tomography (PET). Moreover, we employed a whole-brain multivariate pattern analysis of resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to identify regions where functional connectivity atypically correlates with D2/3R availability depending on ASD diagnosis. Twenty-two psychotropic-free males with ASD and 24 age- and intelligence quotient-matched typically developing males underwent [11C]FLB457 PET, fMRI, and clinical symptom assessment. Participants with ASD showed lower D2/3R availability throughout the D2/3R-rich extrastriatal regions of the dopaminergic pathways. Among these, the posterior region of the thalamus, which primarily comprises the pulvinar, displayed the largest effect size for the lower D2/3R availability, which correlated with a higher score on the Social Affect domain of the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule-2 in participants with ASD. Moreover, lower D2/3R availability was correlated with lower functional connectivity of the thalamus-superior temporal sulcus and cerebellum-medial occipital cortex, specifically in individuals with ASD. The current findings provide novel molecular evidence for the social motivation theory of autism and offer a novel therapeutic target.
35181532|a|BACKGROUND: The clinical effects and neurophysiological mechanisms of prefrontal tDCS and concurrent cognitive remediation training in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) remain unclear. OBJECTIVE: This two-armed, double-blind, randomized, sham-controlled trial aimed to investigate the beneficial effects of tDCS combined with concurrent cognitive remediation training on adolescents and young adults with ASD. METHODS: Participants were randomly assigned to either active or sham tDCS groups and received 1.5 mA prefrontal tDCS with left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex cathode placement and right supraorbital region anode placement for 20 min over two consecutive weeks. tDCS was delivered concurrently with a computerized cognitive remediation training program. Social functioning and its underlying cognitive processes, as well as prefrontal resting-state functional connectivity (rsFC), were measured. RESULTS: The results from 41 participants indicated that multisession prefrontal tDCS, compared to sham tDCS, significantly enhanced the social functioning of ASD individuals [F(1,39) = 4.75, p = .035, etap2 = 0.11]. This improvement was associated with enhanced emotion recognition [F(1,39) = 8.34, p = .006, etap2 = 0.18] and cognitive flexibility [F(1,39) = 4.91, p = .033, etap2 = 0.11]. Specifically, this tDCS protocol optimized information processing efficiency [F(1,39) = 4.43, p = .042, etap2 = 0.10], and the optimization showed a trend to be associated with enhanced rsFC in the right medial prefrontal cortex (rho = 0.339, pFDR = .083). CONCLUSION: Multisession tDCS with left dlPFC cathode placement and right supraorbital region anode placement paired with concurrent cognitive remediation training promoted social functioning in individuals with ASD. This appeared to be associated with the enhancement of the functional connectivity of the right medial PFC, a major hub for flexible social information processing, allowing these individuals to process information more efficiently in response to different social situations. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov (ID: NCT03814083).
35181230|a|BACKGROUND: There is an increasing demand to improve personal health and reduce the social burden in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). A comprehensive review of ASD interventions from the point of view of efficacy, safety, and compliance is needed. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of East Asian Herbal Medicine (EAHM) in the treatment of ASD. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eleven databases (PubMed, Cochrane Library, CINAHL, EMBASE, KISS, RISS, OASIS, KCI, CNKI, Wanfang data, and CiNii) were searched from their respective inception to July 2021. A search was conducted by combining the keywords Autism Spectrum Disorder and Herbal medicine. We included a randomized controlled trial in which oral administration of EAHM was combined with conventional treatment for pediatric ASD patients. The primary outcomes were the clinical efficacy rate and the improvement in Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) score. RESULTS: A total of 7 studies involving 462 children with ASD were included. The results suggest that EAHM as part of a combined therapy enhances the CARS score (MD[95% confidential interval]=4.47[5.89,3.05], p<0.01) and the clinical efficacy rate (RR=1.31[1.14,1.51], p<0.01) in comparison to the control group using only conventional therapy. Safety information was reported in 4 of the 7 included studies, and there were no adverse events or the difference in the incidence of side effects between the two groups was not significant. CONCLUSION: This meta-analysis shows that EAHM may improves the clinical efficacy rate and CARS score in children with ASD. However, in that the quality of the included studies is not generally high and the numbers are difficult to be considered sufficient, larger scale and rigorously designed randomized controlled trials need to be conducted to strengthen the evidence.
35180774|a|Fragile X syndrome (FXS), as a monogenic cause of intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder, has been one of the first neurodevelopmental disorders in which molecular and neuronal mechanisms of disease have been identified, leading to the concept of targeting the underlying disease to reverse symptoms. Translating findings in basic science and animal models to humans with FXS has proven difficult. These challenges have prompted the FXS field to organize to build interlocking projects to support initiatives to improve supportive care, make clinical research accessible to families, generate collaborative research on natural history and outcome measures, and create clinical trial consortia and novel trial designs.
35180632|a|Co-occurring mental health difficulties among autistic adults are common and this association has implications for mental health services. Gaining a comprehensive understanding of autistic adults' experiences of accessing and receiving mental health support is a critical step to fully inform service provision. We conducted a systematic review and meta-synthesis of qualitative studies exploring autistic adults' mental health service experiences, triangulating the perspectives of autistic adults, clinicians and parents. Electronic database searches in MEDLINE, PsycINFO and Embase were conducted up to October 2021. This identified 10,068 studies, of which 38 met study inclusion criteria. Using a thematic synthesis approach, we generated three superordinate analytical themes "Lonely, difficult service experience", "Complexity needs flexibility" and "Collaboration and empowerment", each with several subthemes. Our findings show that currently, mental health services do not adequately support autistic adults, and can even cause additional harm. There is a need for a more flexible, comprehensive and holistic approach, considering how being autistic affects the individual's mental health presentation and tailoring support to their needs. Building trusting relationships, listening to autistic adults, and empowering them to take agency, appear to be fundamental steps towards more successful mental health care provision.
35180544|a|BACKGROUND: Considering the fact that family members necessarily spend more time together during the pandemic, this study aims to reveal the perceptions of parents with children who have autism spectrum disorder of the COVID-19 pandemic in Turkey and their experiences of the difficulties during the pandemic. METHOD: A qualitative phenomenology design was used in the study. Seven mothers and one father gave their consent and participated in the study. Data were collected through semi-structured interviews and analyzed using content analysis. RESULTS: The results of the analysis were collected in two broad themes using 68 codes. The perspective of the parents, who evaluated the pandemic process positively in the beginning, became negative as lockdown lengthened. The issues and adverse effects of the pandemic that they most talked about were the increasing roles and responsibilities of parents, the deep impact on their mental health, and the problems experienced in distance education. CONCLUSIONS: During this period, parents who were psychologically depressed wanted to feel that they were not alone. Parents made many suggestions and recommendations so that others would not have the same experience.
35180464|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder is a neurodevelopmental disorder which is increasing across the globe. The disorder in children not only creates burden of care in caregivers but also leads to impaired quality of life of families. OBJECTIVE: To study the burden of care and quality of life in caregivers of children and adolescents with ASD. METHODOLOGY: Cross sectional study conducted in Child and Adolescent psychiatry outpatient services at a government centre in north India between September 2014 to August 2015. The sample consisted of 40 caregivers of children with Autism. Mean age of the caregiver's were 34.72 +- 6.32 years. Burden of care and quality of life were measured by Burden Assessment Schedule (BAS) and World Health Organization Quality of Life Instrument, Short Form (WHOQOL-BREF) questionnaire respectively. RESULTS: Mean burden of care on BAS was 71.73 +- 8.62 indicating quite a high degree of burden on the caregivers of ASD. Significantly higher burden was reported by caregivers belonging to low income families and caregivers of children in age group 6-12 years. A positive correlation was observed between severity of autism and burden of care in caregivers. The study also found that as the severity of symptom increases the QoL in caregiver worsens. CONCLUSION: Caregivers of children with ASD suffer from high burden of care and impaired QoL.
35179230|a|OBJECTIVE: Epilepsy is common in patients with PIGN diseases due to biallelic variants; however, limited epilepsy phenotyping data have been reported. We describe the epileptology of PIGN encephalopathy. METHODS: We recruited patients with epilepsy due to biallelic PIGN variants and obtained clinical data regarding age at seizure onset/offset and semiology, development, medical history, examination, electroencephalogram, neuroimaging, and treatment. Seizure and epilepsy types were classified. RESULTS: Twenty six patients (13 female) from 26 families were identified, with mean age 7 years (range = 1 month to 21 years; three deceased). Abnormal development at seizure onset was present in 25 of 26. Developmental outcome was most frequently profound (14/26) or severe (11/26). Patients presented with focal motor (12/26), unknown onset motor (5/26), focal impaired awareness (1/26), absence (2/26), myoclonic (2/26), myoclonic-atonic (1/26), and generalized tonic-clonic (2/26) seizures. Twenty of 26 were classified as developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE): 55% (11/20) focal DEE, 30% (6/20) generalized DEE, and 15% (3/20) combined DEE. Six had intellectual disability and epilepsy (ID+E): two generalized and four focal epilepsy. Mean age at seizure onset was 13 months (birth to 10 years), with a lower mean onset in DEE (7 months) compared with ID+E (33 months). Patients with DEE had drug-resistant epilepsy, compared to 4/6 ID+E patients, who were seizure-free. Hyperkinetic movement disorder occurred in 13 of 26 patients. Twenty-seven of 34 variants were novel. Variants were truncating (n = 7), intronic and predicted to affect splicing (n = 7), and missense or inframe indels (n = 20, of which 11 were predicted to affect splicing). Seven variants were recurrent, including p.Leu311Trp in 10 unrelated patients, nine with generalized seizures, accounting for nine of the 11 patients in this cohort with generalized seizures. SIGNIFICANCE: PIGN encephalopathy is a complex autosomal recessive disorder associated with a wide spectrum of epilepsy phenotypes, typically with substantial profound to severe developmental impairment.
35178885|a|The current study aimed to explore the factor structure of a broad range of restricted and repetitive behaviors (RRB) within the autism spectrum. Exploratory structural equation modeling was conducted using individual item-level data from the Diagnostic Interview for Social and Communication Disorders (DISCO). DISCO is a comprehensive semi-structured interview used by clinicians to elicit information from caregivers about the individual's profile of development and behavior. Data from a sample of 226 individuals with a clinical diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (189 males; Mage  = 11.82 years, SDage  = 7.87) were analyzed. The six-factor structure provided the most optimal and interpretable fit (comparative fit index = 0.944, Tucker-Lewis index = 0.923, root mean square error of approximation = 0.018). Derived factors were interpreted as repetitive motor behaviors (RMB), unusual sensory and object focused interests (USOI), sensory sensitivity (SS), insistence on sameness (IS), circumscribed interests (CI) and stereotyped language (SL). Age was significantly negatively associated with RMB, USOI and SL but not with SS, IS or CI factor scores. None of the factors were associated with sex. ASD individuals with intellectual disability (ID) had the highest RMB, USOI, SS and SL scores while those without ID had the highest IS and CI scores. Our findings provide preliminary evidence for the utility of the DISCO as a comprehensive measure of several distinct RRB domains in both research and clinical contexts. Importantly, the current investigation highlights crucial areas for measurement development.
35178882|a|The cerebellum hosts more than half of all neurons of the human brain, with their organized activity playing a key role in coordinating motor functions. Cerebellar activity has also been implicated in the control of speech, communication, and social behavior, which are compromised in autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Despite major research advances, there is a shortage of mechanistic data relating cellular and molecular changes in the cerebellum to autistic behavior. We studied the impact of tuberous sclerosis complex 2 haploinsufficiency (Tsc2+/-) with downstream mTORC1 hyperactivity on cerebellar morphology and cellular organization in 1, 9, and 18 m.o. Eker rats, to determine possible structural correlates of an autism-like behavioural phenotype in this model. We report a greater developmental expansion of the cerebellar vermis, owing to enlarged white matter and thickened molecular layer. Histochemical and immunofluorescence data suggest age-related demyelination of central tract of the vermis, as evident from reduced level of myelin-basic protein in the arbora vitae. We also observed a higher number of astrocytes in Tsc2+/- rats of older age while the number of Purkinje cells (PCs) in these animals was lower than in wild-type controls. Unlike astrocytes and PCs, Bergmann glia remained unaltered at all ages in both genotypes, while the number of microglia was higher in Tsc2+/- rats of older age. The convergent evidence for a variety of age-dependent cellular changes in the cerebellum of rats associated with mTORC1 hyperactivity, thus, predicts an array of functional impairments, which may contribute to the developmental onset of an autism-like behavioral phenotype in this model. LAY SUMMARY: This study elucidates the impact of constitutive mTORC1 hyperactivity on cerebellar morphology and cellular organization in a rat model of autism and epilepsy. It describes age-dependent degeneration of Purkinje neurons, with demyelination of central tract as well as activation of microglia, and discusses the implications of these changes for neuro-behavioral phenotypes. The described changes provide new indications for the putative mechanisms underlying cerebellar impairments with their age-related onset, which may contribute to the pathobiology of autism, epilepsy, and related disorders.
35178690|a|BACKGROUND: Clinical experience suggests that gender variance (GV) and/or gender dysphoria (GD) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) characteristics co-occur more frequently than expected. AIM: This literature review examines the available publications focusing on the co-occurrence of GD/GV and ASD in children and adolescents. METHOD: PubMed and Embase were systematically searched for relevant publications with search terms related to 'autism spectrum disorder' and 'gender dysphoria/gender variance'. RESULTS: A total of 12 publications were included. A higher incidence of comorbidity was reported compared to what is epidemiologically expected, starting from an ASD study population and a population of children and adolescents with GD/GV. The results should be interpreted with caution due to methodological limitations in the studies as e.g. in the diagnostic assessment and the frequent lack of a control group. CONCLUSION: The more frequent co-occurrence of ASD and GD/GV has consequences for clinical practice. In both diagnostic and supportive care pathways, it is advisable to recognize and acknowledge both conditions and to work out an adapted pathway. More targeted research into specific characteristics in this group is necessary in order to fine-tune (mental) health care and long-term perspectives.
35178651|a|People with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) show abnormal face perception and emotion recognition. However, it remains largely unknown whether these differences are associated with abnormal physiological responses when viewing faces. In this study, we employed a sensitive emotion judgment task and conducted a detailed investigation of pupil dilation/constriction and oscillation in high-functioning adult participants with ASD and matched controls. We found that participants with ASD showed normal pupil constriction to faces; however, they demonstrated reduced pupil oscillation, which was independent of stimulus properties and participants' perception of the emotion. Together, our results have revealed an abnormal physiological response to faces in people with ASD, which may in turn be associated with impaired face perception previously found in many studies.
35178102|a|Background: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a highly heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder with complex pathogenesis. Currently, the pathogenesis of ASD is not fully understood. Moreover, current treatments do not effectively alleviate the primary symptoms of ASD social disorder (SCDA). Jiawei Yinhuo Tang (JWYHT) is an improved version of the classic prescription Yinhuo Tang. Although this medication has been shown to improve social behavior in ASD patients, the mechanism by which it works remains unknown. Methods: In this study, network pharmacology bioinformatics analysis was used to identify the key targets, biological functions, and signal pathways of JWYHT in SCDA. Then, molecular docking and molecular dynamic simulation were used to validate the activity and stability of the active ingredient and the target protein during the binding process. Results: The analysis identified 157 key targets and 9 core targets of JWYHT (including proto-oncogene (FOS), caspase 3 (CASP3), mitogen-activated protein kinase-3 (MAPK3), interleukin-6 (IL6), mitogen-activated protein kinase-1 (MAPK1), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), mitogen-activated protein kinase-8 (MAPK8), AKT serine/threonine kinase 1 (AKT1), and 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1B (5HT1B)) in SCDA. In addition, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Gene and Genome results, as well as the staggering network analyses, revealed 20 biological processes and 20 signal pathways targeted by JWYHT in SCDA. Finally, molecular docking analysis was used to determine the binding activity of the main active components of JWYHT to the key targets. The binding activity and stability of methyl arachidonate and MAPK8 were demonstrated using molecular dynamics simulation. Conclusion: This study demonstrates that JWYHT regulates neuronal development, synaptic transmission, intestinal and cerebral inflammatory response, and other processes in SCDA.
35177979|a|Recent clinical and preclinical evidence points towards empathogenic and prosocial effects elicited by psychedelic compounds, notably the serotonin 5-HT2A agonists lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), psilocybin, N,N-Dimethyltryptamine (DMT), and their derivatives. These findings suggest a therapeutic potential of psychedelic compounds for some of the behavioural traits associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), a neurodevelopmental condition characterized by atypical social behaviour. In this review, we highlight evidence suggesting that psychedelics may potentially ameliorate some of the behavioural atypicalities of ASD, including reduced social behaviour and highly co-occurring anxiety and depression. Next, we discuss dysregulated neurobiological systems in ASD and how they may underlie or potentially limit the therapeutic effects of psychedelics. These phenomena include: 1) synaptic function, 2) serotonergic signaling, 3) prefrontal cortex activity, and 4) thalamocortical signaling. Lastly, we discuss clinical studies from the 1960s and 70s that assessed the use of psychedelics in the treatment of children with ASD. We highlight the positive behavioural outcomes of these studies, including enhanced mood and social behaviour, as well as the adverse effects of these trials, including increases in aggressive behaviour and dissociative and psychotic states. Despite preliminary evidence, further studies are needed to determine whether the benefits of psychedelic treatment in ASD outweigh the risks associated with the use of these compounds in this population, and if the 5-HT2A receptor may represent a target for social-behavioural disorders.
35177841|a|Cardiometabolic diseases are the leading cause of death worldwide. Despite a known genetic component, our understanding of these diseases remains incomplete. Here, we analyzed the contribution of rare variants to 57 diseases and 26 cardiometabolic traits, using data from 200,337 UK Biobank participants with whole-exome sequencing. We identified 57 gene-based associations, with broad replication of novel signals in Geisinger MyCode. There was a striking risk associated with mutations in known Mendelian disease genes, including MYBPC3, LDLR, GCK, PKD1 and TTN. Many genes showed independent convergence of rare and common variant evidence, including an association between GIGYF1 and type 2 diabetes. We identified several large effect associations for height and 18 unique genes associated with blood lipid or glucose levels. Finally, we found that between 1.0% and 2.4% of participants carried rare potentially pathogenic variants for cardiometabolic disorders. These findings may facilitate studies aimed at therapeutics and screening of these common disorders.
35177824|a|Despite experiencing a significant trauma, only a subset of World Trade Center (WTC) rescue and recovery workers developed posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Identification of biomarkers is critical to the development of targeted interventions for treating disaster responders and potentially preventing the development of PTSD in this population. Analysis of gene expression from these individuals can help in identifying biomarkers of PTSD. We established a well-phenotyped sample of 371 WTC responders, recruited from a longitudinal WTC responder cohort using stratified random sampling, by obtaining blood, self-reported and clinical interview data. Using bulk RNA-sequencing from whole blood, we examined the association between gene expression and WTC-related PTSD symptom severity on (i) highest lifetime Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS) score, (ii) past-month CAPS score, and (iii) PTSD symptom dimensions using a 5-factor model of re-experiencing, avoidance, emotional numbing, dysphoric arousal and anxious arousal symptoms. We corrected for sex, age, genotype-derived principal components and surrogate variables. Finally, we performed a meta-analysis with existing PTSD studies (total N = 1016), using case/control status as the predictor and correcting for these variables. We identified 66 genes significantly associated with total highest lifetime CAPS score (FDR-corrected p < 0.05), and 31 genes associated with total past-month CAPS score. Our more granular analyses of PTSD symptom dimensions identified additional genes that did not reach statistical significance in our analyses with total CAPS scores. In particular, we identified 82 genes significantly associated with lifetime anxious arousal symptoms. Several genes significantly associated with multiple PTSD symptom dimensions and total lifetime CAPS score (SERPINA1, RPS6KA1, and STAT3) have been previously associated with PTSD. Geneset enrichment of these findings has identified pathways significant in metabolism, immune signaling, other psychiatric disorders, neurological signaling, and cellular structure. Our meta-analysis revealed 10 genes that reached genome-wide significance, all of which were downregulated in cases compared to controls (CIRBP, TMSB10, FCGRT, CLIC1, RPS6KB2, HNRNPUL1, ALDOA, NACA, ZNF429 and COPE). Additionally, cellular deconvolution highlighted an enrichment in CD4 T cells and eosinophils in responders with PTSD compared to controls. The distinction in significant genes between total lifetime CAPS score and the anxious arousal symptom dimension of PTSD highlights a potential biological difference in the mechanism underlying the heterogeneity of the PTSD phenotype. Future studies should be clear about methods used to analyze PTSD status, as phenotypes based on PTSD symptom dimensions may yield different gene sets than combined CAPS score analysis. Potential biomarkers implicated from our meta-analysis may help improve therapeutic target development for PTSD.
35177673|a|Natural events are often multisensory, requiring the brain to combine information from the same spatial location and timing, across different senses. The importance of temporal coincidence has led to the introduction of the temporal binding window (TBW) construct, defined as the time range within which multisensory inputs are highly likely to be perceptually bound into a single entity. Anomalies in TBWs have been linked to confused perceptual experiences and inaccurate filtering of sensory inputs coming from different environmental sources. Indeed, larger TBWs have been associated with disorders such as schizophrenia and autism and are also correlated to a higher level of subclinical traits of these conditions in the general population. Here, we tested the feasibility of using a web-based version of a classic audio-visual simultaneity judgment (SJ) task with simple flash-beep stimuli in order to measure multisensory temporal acuity and its relationship with schizotypal traits as measured in the general population. Results show that: (i) the response distribution obtained in the web-based SJ task was strongly similar to those reported by studies carried out in controlled laboratory settings, and (ii) lower multisensory temporal acuity was associated with higher schizotypal traits in the "cognitive-perceptual" domains. Our findings reveal the possibility of adequately using a web-based audio-visual SJ task outside a controlled laboratory setting, available to a more diverse and representative pool of participants. These results provide additional evidence for a close relationship between lower multisensory acuity and the expression of schizotypal traits in the general population.
35177498|a|QUESTION: Several parents have recently asked me if oxytocin would be helpful for treating their children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). What do we currently know about the use of oxytocin for the treatment of children with ASD? ANSWER: Autism spectrum disorder is prevalent among children in Canada, with most affected children experiencing difficulties with social function. Behavioural and educational interventions are the first-line treatments for children with ASD. Multiple studies of oxytocin in children with ASD from the past 2 decades provide equivocal results related to social functioning, and a recent large study did not show benefit from treatment with oxytocin. Small sample sizes and differences in participant age, oxytocin formulation and dose, treatment duration, outcome measures, and analytic methods may help explain some of these disparities. The fact that ASD has a range of clinical presentations may also contribute to mixed results. The use of oxytocin has limited benefit in changing social function in children with ASD and there is no support for its current use in the treatment of this population.
35176891|a|In this study, we evaluated the cochlea, medial olivocochlear system, and brainstem function in autistic children using evoked otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) and a noninvasive contralateral suppression (CLS) test. In total, we included 21 autistic children with normal hearing (study group) and 11 healthy children (control group). Transient-evoked OAEs (TEOAEs) and CLS of TEOAE were evaluated in the left and right ears of all patients. In a silent room, spontaneous, transient, and dP ILO292 were evaluated. The mean age of the study and control group was 9.1 years (range: 6-13 and 6-12 years, respectively). For the study group, there was no statistically significant difference between the OAE and CLS values of the right ear (P > .05). However, for the left ears, OAE values were statistically significantly higher than the CLS values (P < .05). In the control group, the OAE values of both ears were statistically significantly higher than the CLS values (P < .05). In autistic children with normal hearing, the medial olivocochlear system functions more effectively in the right ear than the left ear. Asymmetry between the ears is likely responsible for the peripheral auditory lateralization and independence in auditory function between the left and right ears.
35176551|a|Recent evidence suggests that structural and functional brain aging is atypical in adults with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, it remains unclear if oscillatory slowing, a key marker of neurophysiological aging, follows an atypical trajectory in this population. This study examines patterns of age-related oscillatory slowing in adults with ASD, captured by reductions in the brain's peak alpha frequency (PAF). Resting-state electroencephalography (EEG) data from adults (18-70 years) with ASD (N = 93) and non-ASD controls (N = 87) were pooled from three independent datasets. A robust curve-fitting procedure quantified the peak frequency of alpha oscillations (7-13 Hz) across all brain regions. Associations between PAF and age were assessed and compared between groups. Consistent with characteristic patterns of oscillatory slowing, PAF was negatively associated with age across the entire sample (p < .0001). A significant group-by-age interaction revealed that this relationship was more pronounced in adults with ASD (p < .01). These findings invite further longitudinal investigations of PAF in adults with ASD to confirm if age-related oscillatory slowing is accelerated.
35175820|a|Convergent evidence associates exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) with major human diseases, even at regulation-compliant concentrations. This might be because humans are exposed to EDC mixtures, whereas chemical regulation is based on a risk assessment of individual compounds. Here, we developed a mixture-centered risk assessment strategy that integrates epidemiological and experimental evidence. We identified that exposure to an EDC mixture in early pregnancy is associated with language delay in offspring. At human-relevant concentrations, this mixture disrupted hormone-regulated and disease-relevant regulatory networks in human brain organoids and in the model organisms Xenopus leavis and Danio rerio, as well as behavioral responses. Reinterrogating epidemiological data, we found that up to 54% of the children had prenatal exposures above experimentally derived levels of concern, reaching, for the upper decile compared with the lowest decile of exposure, a 3.3 times higher risk of language delay.
35175416|a|Although widely believed by pediatricians and parents to be safe for use in infants and children when used as directed, increasing evidence indicates that early life exposure to paracetamol (acetaminophen) may cause long-term neurodevelopmental problems. Furthermore, recent studies in animal models demonstrate that cognitive development is exquisitely sensitive to paracetamol exposure during early development. In this study, evidence for the claim that paracetamol is safe was evaluated using a systematic literature search. Publications on PubMed between 1974 and 2017 that contained the keywords "infant" and either "paracetamol" or "acetaminophen" were considered. Of those initial 3096 papers, 218 were identified that made claims that paracetamol was safe for use with infants or children. From these 218, a total of 103 papers were identified as sources of authority for the safety claim.   Conclusion: A total of 52 papers contained actual experiments designed to test safety, and had a median follow-up time of 48 h. None monitored neurodevelopment. Furthermore, no trial considered total exposure to drug since birth, eliminating the possibility that the effects of drug exposure on long-term neurodevelopment could be accurately assessed. On the other hand, abundant and sufficient evidence was found to conclude that paracetamol does not induce acute liver damage in babies or children when used as directed. What is Known:   Paracetamol (acetaminophen) is widely thought by pediatricians and parents to be safe when used as directed in the pediatric population, and is the most widely used drug in that population, with more than 90% of children exposed to the drug in some reports.   Paracetamol is known to cause liver damage in adults under conditions of oxidative stress or when used in excess, but increasing evidence from studies in humans and in laboratory animals indicates that the target organ for paracetamol toxicity during early development is the brain, not the liver. What is New:   This study finds hundreds of published reports in the medical literature asserting that paracetamol is safe when used as directed, providing a foundation for the widespread belief that the drug is safe.   This study shows that paracetamol was proven to be safe by approximately 50 short-term studies demonstrating the drug's safety for the pediatric liver, but the drug was never shown to be safe for neurodevelopment. Paracetamol is widely believed to be safe for infants and children when used as directed, despite mounting evidence in humans and in laboratory animals indicating that the drug is not safe for neurodevelopment. An exhaustive search of published work cited for safe use of paracetamol in the pediatric population revealed 52 experimental studies pointing toward safety, but the median follow-up time was only 48 h, and neurodevelopment was never assessed.
35174584|a|Research concerning temperament in children and adults with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has suggested a consistent profile of low positive affect, high negative affect, and low regulation (Visser et al., 2016). One area receiving less attention is individual differences among children diagnosed with ASD. The primary objective of this study was to use a person-centered approach to explore heterogeneity of early temperament precursors of regulation in a large sample of infants with elevated familial likelihood of ASD. Early precursors of regulation included temperament assessed at 6, 12, and 24 months whereas outcome measures were diagnosis of ASD, cognitive ability and adaptive behavior at 36 months. Participants included 176 low-likelihood and 473 elevated-likelihood infants, 129 of whom were diagnosed with ASD at 3 years. Results supported a three-profile solution: a well-regulated profile (high positive affect and high attentional focus and shifting), a low attention focus profile (higher attentional shifting compared to attentional focus), and a low attention shifting profile (higher attentional focus compared to attentional shifting). A higher proportion of children diagnosed with ASD were classified into the low attention shifting profile. Furthermore, children with the well-regulated profile were differentiated from the other profiles by a pattern of higher social competence and lower dysregulation whereas children with the low attention focus profile were distinguished from the other profiles by higher cognitive ability at 3 years. The findings indicate that the combination of early positive affect with attention measures may provide an enhanced tool for prediction of self-regulation and later outcomes. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
35174492|a|BACKGROUND: Autism can be diagnosed from 2 years of age, although most autistic people receive their diagnosis later than this after they have started education. Research is required to understand why some autistic children are diagnosed late, and the level and nature of unmet need prior to diagnosis for late-diagnosed children. METHODS: We examined trajectories of emotional, behavioural and social difficulties (EBSDs) across childhood and adolescence, comparing 'earlier-diagnosed' (diagnosed 7 years or younger) with 'late-diagnosed' (diagnosed between 8 and 14 years) autistic children. Data were from the Millennium Cohort Study, a population-based UK birth cohort. EBSDs were measured using the parent-report Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire, at 3, 5, 7, 11 and 14 years. We used Growth Curve Modelling to investigate levels and rates of change in these difficulties, and to compare earlier- (n = 146) and late-diagnosed (n = 284) autistic children. RESULTS: Aged 5, earlier-diagnosed autistic children had more emotional (i.e., internalising), conduct, hyperactivity and social difficulties; although clinical difficulties in these areas were nevertheless common in late-diagnosed children. There was a faster annual increase in scores for all domains for late-diagnosed children, and by age 14 years, they had higher levels of EBSDs. These results persisted when we ran adjusted models, to account for the late-diagnosed group having higher rates of late-diagnosed attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, higher IQ, a higher proportion of females and older and more educated mothers. CONCLUSIONS: Emotional, behavioural and social difficulties are associated with, and may influence, the timing of autism diagnosis. Late-diagnosed autistic children often have high levels of mental health and social difficulties prior to their autism diagnosis, and tend to develop even more severe problems as they enter adolescence.
35174388|a|BACKGROUND: As prenatal vaccinations continue to be given more frequently, it is important to assess long-term safety events. This study investigates the association between prenatal influenza vaccination or infection and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) risk in offspring. METHODS: Retrospective cohort study of mother-child pairs with deliveries 1/1/2011-12/31/2014 at Kaiser Permanente Southern California was performed. Children >1 year were followed through 12/31/2018. Maternal influenza vaccination or infection during pregnancy was obtained from electronic health records. ASD was defined by International Classification of Diseases, 9th/10th Revision codes after age 1 year. Cox proportional hazards models estimated the crude and inverse probability of treatment weighted (IPTW) hazard ratios (HR) for the association between maternal influenza vaccination or infection and ASD. RESULTS: There were 84,739 mother-child pairs included in the final analytic sample. Maternal vaccination coverage increased slightly over time, from 52.7% for 2011 births to 59.6% for 2014 births. Of the 46,257 women vaccinated, 32.4% were vaccinated during the 1 st trimester, 41.8% during the 2 nd trimester, and 25.8% during the 3 rd trimester. ASD was diagnosed in 1,930 (2.3%) children. The IPTW analyses showed no association between prenatal influenza vaccination or infection and ASD in offspring (HR: 1.04, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.95, 1.13; HR: 1.12, 95% CI: 0.66, 1.89, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: Prenatal influenza vaccination or infection was not associated with ASD risk in offspring. The findings support recommendations to vaccinate pregnant women to protect themselves and their infants, both of whom are vulnerable to severe morbidity following infection.
35173790|a|Since the first half of the 20th century there has been an interest in the study of the relationship between autism and autistic-like clinical features and with visual impairments. Autism Spectrum disorders are one of the more worldwide-studied neurodevelopmental disorder with an increasing prevalence in the last ten years. Visual impairment is a condition which derives from several causes (genetic, constitutional, injuries, nutritional and environmental ones). Again, it is a kind of spectrum and an overarching category, because visual impairments range from refractive errors (myopia, hyperopia, astigmatism), to amblyopia, strabismus, and to partial and total blindness. Since the first study of Keeler (1956) which described autistic-like patterns in five preschool children who were totally blind due to retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), a growing number of researchers addressed the relationship between autism and visual impairment. In this paper we focused on it, aiming to discuss on some lessons learned in this field and to discuss some open questions since the first research in this field.
35173679|a|Objectives: 1) To explore the associations between autistic traits and sex hormone changes in patients with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS); 2) To explore the influence of PCOS parental autistic traits and related sex hormone changes on autistic traits in their offspring. Method: This is a case-control study that recruited two groups: polycystic ovarian syndrome-induced infertile subjects as the observation group and fallopian tube factor-induced infertility subjects as the control group. Both cohorts were patients undergoing infertility treatment in the Productive Medicine Center, Peking University People's Hospital. Two types of questionnaires were completed by patients between May 1st, 2015, and May 1st, 2016: 1. The autism-spectrum quotient (AQ) 2. Repetitive behavior scale-revised (RBS-r). Levels of sex hormones in serum were measured in patients. The correlations between the levels of these biochemical factors and scores of the autistic traits were analysed. From July 1st, 2020 to September 1st, 2021, these patients were followed up by telephone and asked to fill out a questionnaire online. The questionnaire included date of delivery, complications, medicine used and negative events during pregnancy (e.g., death of relatives, divorce, etc.), delivery condition, breastfeeding, AQ scale and Autism Behavior Checklist (ABC) of their children. Results: The patients in the PCOS group had significantly higher AQ scores than those in the control group. Levels of luteinizing hormone and testosterone were also higher in the PCOS group. No significant differences were found between the two groups in RBS-r levels, follicle-stimulating hormone, estradiol or progesterone. In the two combined groups, there were significantly positive correlations between the AQ scores and the luteinizing hormone concentration, as well as between scores of RBS-r and testosterone concentration. Moreover, there was a significantly negative correlation between the level of progesterone and the RBS-r score. According to the follow-up data, the AQ scores of offspring were positively correlated with the RBS-r scores of their mothers. The ABC scores of offspring were positively correlated with the RBS-r scores and the childbearing age of their mothers. No significant difference was found between the two groups in age of delivery, complications, special medication used, negative events during pregnancy, delivery situation, postpartum breastfeeding, age of children, or AQ scores or ABC scores of children. There were no significant correlations between the scale scores of children and the related sex hormone levels of mothers. This could indicate that the higher levels of luteinizing hormone and testosterone and the lower level of progesterone accompanied more pronounced autistic traits in PCOS. Furthermore, the higher delivery age and RBS-r score in mothers accompanied the higher AQ and ABC scores in children. Conclusion: Compared with the control group, PCOS patients had more autistic traits (especially social dysfunction). The autistic traits in PCOS patients might be related to the elevation in testosterone concentration and luteinizing hormone levels and the decline in progesterone level. Moreover, the autistic traits in the offspring of PCOS patients might be related to the parental high delivery age and high tendency to autism traits.
35173658|a|Driving is central to adult independence and autonomy; yet most autistic young adults do not acquire driver's licenses. It is important to understand barriers to achieving this milestone for autistic adults. Differences in negative affect and emotion dysregulation associated with autism may interfere with managing difficult driving situations. The current study compared perceived driving difficulty (DD), emotion dysregulation, and negative affect in emerging drivers with and without autistic traits (AT), and investigated how emotion dysregulation and negative affect relate to perceived DD. We expected (1) greater perceived DD, emotion dysregulation, and negative affect in participants with AT and (2) a positive correlation of perceived DD with both emotion dysregulation and negative affect in the whole sample. Thirty-seven adolescents and young adults (15 AT) self-reported perceived DD in 15 scenarios and completed the Difficulty in Emotion Dysregulation Scale (DERS) and the Depression, Anxiety, and Stress Scale (DASS). Autistic participants scored significantly higher on mean perceived DD, DERS Impulse subscale, DASS total and DASS Stress subscale scores. Perceived DD positively correlated with the DERS and DASS total scores, all DASS subscales, and DERS Nonacceptance, Goals, and Impulse subscales across the whole sample. The findings highlight the roles of emotion dysregulation and negative affect in perceived DD in emerging drivers with AT. In particular, emotional stress and impulsivity may map onto mechanisms of over-reactivity to negative affect and explain why autistic people perceive particular situations as difficult when driving. Implications and directions for future research are discussed.
35173636|a|Differences in social attention development begin to be apparent in the 6th to 12th month of development in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and theoretically reflect important elements of its neurodevelopmental endophenotype. This paper examines alternative conceptual views of these early social attention symptoms and hypotheses about the mechanisms involved in their development. One model emphasizes mechanism involved in the spontaneous allocation of attention to faces, or social orienting. Alternatively, another model emphasizes mechanisms involved in the coordination of attention with other people, or joint attention, and the socially bi-directional nature of its development. This model raises the possibility that atypical responses of children to the attention or the gaze of a social partner directed toward themselves may be as important in the development of social attention symptoms as differences in the development of social orienting. Another model holds that symptoms of social attention may be important to early development, but may not impact older individuals with ASD. The alterative model is that the social attention symptoms in infancy (social orienting and joint attention), and social cognitive symptoms in childhood and adulthood share common neurodevelopmental substrates. Therefore, differences in early social attention and later social cognition constitute a developmentally continuous axis of symptom presentation in ASD. However, symptoms in older individuals may be best measured with in vivo measures of efficiency of social attention and social cognition in social interactions rather than the accuracy of response on analog tests used in measures with younger children. Finally, a third model suggests that the social attention symptoms may not truly be a symptom of ASD. Rather, they may be best conceptualized as stemming from differences domain general attention and motivation mechanisms. The alternative argued for here that infant social attention symptoms meet all the criteria of a unique dimension of the phenotype of ASD and the bi-directional phenomena involved in social attention cannot be fully explained in terms of domain general aspects of attention development.
35173572|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a heterogeneous disorder characterized by different levels of repetitive and stereotypic behavior as well as deficits in social interaction and communication. In this current study, we explored the changes in cerebral neural activities in ASD. The purpose of this study is to investigate whether there exists a dysfunction of interactive information processing between the prefrontal cortex and posterior brain regions in ASD. We investigated the atypical connectivity and information flow between the prefrontal cortex and posterior brain regions in ASD utilizing the entropy connectivity (a kind of directional connectivity) method. Eighty-nine patients with ASD and 94 typical developing (TD) teenagers participated in this study. Two-sample t-tests revealed weakened interactive entropy connectivity between the prefrontal cortex and posterior brain regions. This result indicates that there exists interactive prefrontal-posterior underconnectivity in ASD, and this disorder might lead to less prior knowledge being used and updated. Our proposals highlighted that aforementioned atypical change might accelerate the deoptimization of brain networks in ASD.
35173134|a|Individuals with high levels of autistic traits are at a high risk of experiencing depressive symptoms, and are also vulnerable to job stress. This study aimed to identify which combination of autistic traits and type of job stress are related to depressive symptoms. Participants comprised 992 workers from different regions of Japan. Autistic traits, depressive symptoms, and job stress were measured using the Autism-Spectrum Quotient, K6 scale, and Job Content Questionnaire, respectively. Logistic regression was performed to estimate the odds ratio and 95% confidence interval. Workers with high autistic traits scores reported significantly more depressive symptoms for all job stress types, especially high job demand. Depressive symptoms differed according to autistic traits and job stress. In workers with high autistic trait subscale scores, those with active job stress reported more depressive symptoms than those with high strain job stress, except for the "poor imagination" trait. This is contrary to previous reports that the active stress type is generally less associated with depressive symptoms than the high-strain stress type. To prevent depressive symptoms in workers with high autistic trait scores, it is important to understand which combination of autistic traits and type of job stress contribute to depressive symptoms.
35172661|a|BACKGROUND: The management of challenging behaviours in inpatient with intellectual disability and/or autism spectrum disorders can lead to an escalation of control measures. In these complex situations where patients have an intellectual disability/autism spectrum disorder accompanied by a psychiatric comorbidity, the experiences of caregivers related to the crisis management have rarely been studied. PURPOSE: This study examined the moral experiences of caregivers related to challenging behaviours' management and alternatives to control measures. RESEARCH DESIGN: Using Charles Taylor's hermeneutic framework, a 2-month focused ethnography with a participatory approach was used. PARTICIPANTS AND RESEARCH CONTEXT: Sixteen caregivers were interviewed in a Canadian mental health setting for adults with intellectual disability/autism spectrum disorder and psychiatric comorbidity. ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS: The research was conducted in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki and local Research Ethics Board approval. Written informed consent was collected systematically from participants. FINDINGS: By accounting for caregivers' moral experiences, this study sheds light on a neglected dimension of the care relationship: the vulnerability of the caregiver. We highlight the main barriers and facilitators to alternatives to control measures. First, a caregiver's vulnerability was characterised by the overall impact of challenging behaviours and the moral distress associated with the use of control measures and exclusion mechanisms of intellectual disability/autism spectrum disorder patients. Second, a strong ambiguity between care and control measures and a lack of inclusive approaches were identified as the two main barriers to challenging behaviour management. Third, the involvement, both professional and personal, of caregivers was deemed necessary to implement alternatives to control measures. DISCUSSION: A conflict of values opposes two conceptions of autonomy: a rational autonomy, which is counterproductive to the reduction of control measures, versus a relational autonomy based on shared vulnerability. CONCLUSION: The recognition of caregiver's vulnerability is a benchmark to create alternative approaches, which defuse the logic of control and promote an ethics of care within which caregivers' self-concern can be understood as fostering mutual respect.
35171982|a|IMPORTANCE: Motor and sensory challenges are commonly reported among autistic individuals and have been linked to challenges with daily living skills (DLS). To best inform clinical intervention, greater specificity in how sensory and motor challenges relate to DLS is needed. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the relationship between combined sensory and motor scores and DLS performance among autistic and nonautistic children and to explore associations between motor scores and performance on specific DLS items. DESIGN: Descriptive design. SETTING: University research lab. PARTICIPANTS: Autistic children, nonautistic children with no family history of or diagnosis related to autism, and nonautistic children with a family history of or diagnosis related to autism (ages 6-10 yr; N = 101). All participants communicated verbally. INTERVENTION: None. Outcomes and Measures: Parent-report measures of DLS and sensory features and standardized assessments of motor performance. RESULTS: Findings indicated a strong relationship between motor difficulties and all domains of DLS. At the item level, motor skills were associated with occupations of dressing, bathing, health management, cleaning up and organization, meal preparation and clean-up, education, and safety. Combined sensory and motor measures better predicted DLS than sensory or motor measures alone. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Children with motor and sensory challenges are likely to experience challenges with a diversity of occupations, which is important given the prevalence of motor and sensory challenges among autistic children and among children with other neurodevelopmental conditions. Therapeutic interventions that account for or address these motor challenges and associated sensory features are likely to further enhance DLS. What This Article Adds: A combination of motor challenges and sensory features better predict DLS than either motor or sensory challenges alone. In addition, motor challenges in children are most highly associated with DLS challenges in the domains of dressing, bathing, cleaning, education, safety, health, and meal preparation. Occupational therapists can use this information when considering how the results of sensory and motor assessment may guide clinical intervention in autistic and nonautistic children.
35171808|a|Autism is a neurobiological developmental disorder characterized by poor social interaction and communication, narrow interests, and stereotyped behaviors. It has been associated with disorders of synaptogenesis and multiple etiologies. The identification of the epigenetic factors involved in the genesis of autism allows a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved. Our objective was to analyze the epigenetic mechanisms related to the development of autism, specifying specific entities and their pathophysiological mechanisms. We analyze how DNA methylation disorders, histone modification, remodeling and chromosomal regulation mediated by non-coding RNA are related to various genetic syndromes such as fragile X, Rett, Pathias Mecp2, Phelam McDermid, prenatal toxins such as alcohol, valproic. acid, cannabis, and environmental toxins such as maternal stress, all associated with a higher prevalence of autism. In conclusion: the recognition of these mechanisms opens up new possibilities for prevention and it is likely that, in genetic entities, it will allow the development of specific treatments with modifications tailored to each entity.
35171807|a|The characteristics of individuals with persistent ASD (ASD-P) and remittent ASD (ASD-R) are little known. This longitudinal study had three objectives 1) To determine the persistence and recovery in children with autism spectrum disorder diagnosis in adolescence: 2) To compare executive functioning (EF), socio-adaptive and behavioral manifestations of ASD-P and ASD-R adolescents; and 3) to identify the percentage of normalized individuals in ADS-P and ADS-R groups in EF, socio-adaptive and behavioral manifestation in childhood and adolescence. The sample at T1 was comprised of 45 children with ASD (aged 7-11), maintaining 32 ASD diagnosis five years later. Parents and teachers completed questionnaires on EF, theory of mind, socio-adaptive and behavior difficulties, at both time points. The ASD-P group presented significantly more problems than group ASD-Rand showed worst evolution in EF, socio-adaptive and behavioral domains. Our findings highlight the variability of developmental trajectories of children with ASD.
35171806|a|INTRODUCTION: Autism or ASDs are neurodevelopmental disorders that affect socio-communicative development, interests, and a restricted and stereotyped pattern of interests and behavior. Epidemiological studies indicate that there are 3 times more boys affected with autism than girls but clinical studies indicate a much higher preponderance in favor of boys. There is an under detection of autism with a late or wrong diagnosis more frequently in girls and women with autism. OBJECTIVE: To analyze the clinical presentation of autism in girls and women, factors related to under detection and diagnosis or diagnostic confusion, and mechanisms for improving its diagnosis and intervention. MATERIAL AND METHODS: We will analyze the differences in the clinical presentation of autism between genders, social and cultural factors, cognitive aspects and differential comorbidities in boys and girls with autism, current limitations of diagnostic instruments for the evaluation of autism and which are aspects to improve for a better identification, earlier and more accurate of autism in the female gender. CONCLUSIONS: Autism in the female gender presents differential clinical, cognitive and biological characteristics associated with under detection and late diagnosis.
35171805|a|This review focuses on four interrelated teams and research lines that form the basis for new research on the pathogenesis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) at the Marcus Autism Center, in Atlanta (US). These themes probe typical social behavior and brain development from birth, and disruptions thereof in babies later diagnosed with ASD. These four themes are: to leverage lifetime maximal neuroplasticity; to test the hypothesis that developmental disruption of early-emerging mechanisms of socialization drives pathogenesis and results in autistic social disability; the focus on the infant-caregiver dyad, and the iterative context associated with mutually reinforcing and adapted social and communitive inter-action, or emerging cycles of social contingency, from the first days and weeks of life; and the study of time-varying neurodevelopmental transitions in social behavior from experience-expectant (reflexive, endogenous) and subcortically-guided to experience-dependent (caregiver- and reward-driven) and cortically-guided, a transition that our work suggests is uniquely disrupted in babies later diagnosed with ASD. This science is opening a world of opportunities to optimize children's outcomes despite the genetic liabilities that they are born with. It provides the scientific grounding for new community-viable solutions for increasing access to early interventions using treatments that scaffold and strengthen infant-caregiver interactions, which is the platform for early brain development.
35171773|a|
35171495|a|BACKGROUND: Anorexia nervosa not only results in severe malnutrition but also carries a high risk of sudden death. Although fatal arrhythmias are the most common cause of sudden death, it is often unclear what exactly causes them. To the best of our knowledge, there have been no reports of cerebellar tonsillar herniations in patients with anorexia nervosa. CASE PRESENTATION: A 17-year-old girl with anorexia nervosa and autism spectrum disorder was admitted to the pediatric ward for extreme weight loss. Since she refused to take oral nutrition or tube feeding, we started continuous intravenous fluids. Eight hours after admission, she suddenly went into cardiopulmonary arrest and died despite resuscitation. A postmortem autopsy revealed the unexpected findings of generalized severe cerebral edema and cerebellar tonsillar herniation. CONCLUSION: Intracranial hypertension may need to be considered when the condition of patients with anorexia nervosa suddenly worsens during refeeding periods. Postmortem autopsy and autopsy imaging are recommended to determine the exact cause of sudden death. LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level IV: Evidence obtained from multiple time series analysis such as case studies. (NB: Dramatic results in uncontrolled trials might also be regarded as this type of evidence).
35171377|a|This article constitutes a translation from the Russian of G.E. Sukhareva's research report entitled (in English) 'Toward the problem of the structure and dynamics of children's constitutional psychopathies (Schizoid forms)', which she delivered at the 'behavioral' conference in Leningrad in early 1930. Lev Vygotsky also presented on 'difficult children' in the same session of this conference. Sukhareva worked as a clinician for many years in residential and out-patient psychiatric settings at the Psycho-Neurological Institute in Moscow. This is (at least) the third of Sukhareva's publications on schizoid children, preceding her subsequent work on schizophrenia and oligophrenia (intellectual disability). Here she offers new case material, and further theoretical elaboration, concerning children diagnosed as schizoid, who closely resembled what we now think of as autistic children. We include background information useful to contextualize this work historically, and commentary on some of the questions raised for the 'history of autism' by Sukhareva's work.
35170710|a|Hyperhidrosis is characterized by excessive sweating and it affects almost 5% of the population. The affected age group is wide, and it can affect from children to elderlies. There are two types of hyperhidrosis: generalized and focal. Treatment depends on the symptoms presented. In more severe cases, radiofrequency sympatholysis and bilateral thoracic sympathectomy are the options. However, recurrence is possible or the postoperative appearance of conditions called compensatory hyperhidrosis or reflex hyperhidrosis. We describe two cases of patients treated with Cannabidiol who had significant and unexpected improvement of hyperhidrosis. The first patient received Cannabidiol specific for public presentations at work, and the second patient had a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. The hyperhidrosis improved in both patients immediately after using Cannabidiol.
35170572|a|OBJECTIVE: Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) may achieve continence later than other children. Little is known about factors associated with toileting resistance in children with ASD and other developmental delays/disabilities (DD). We sought to describe toileting resistance in children with ASD and DD and those from the general population (POP) and identify factors associated with toileting resistance in children with ASD and DD. METHOD: Families and children aged 24 to 68 months were enrolled in the Study to Explore Early Development, a multisite case-control study on ASD. Children with ASD (N = 743) and DD (N = 766) and those from the POP (N = 693) who were 48 months or older were included in this study. Parents reported toileting resistance, gastrointestinal issues, behavior problems, and ASD symptoms in their children. Children completed an in-person evaluation to determine ASD status and developmental level. RESULTS: Toileting resistance was more common among children with ASD (49.1%) than children with DD (23.6%) and those from the POP (8.0%). Diarrhea and deficits in social awareness were significantly associated with toileting resistance in children with ASD and DD. Constipation, expressive language delays, and low social motivation were significantly associated with toileting resistance only in children with ASD; very low visual reception skills and oppositional behaviors were significantly associated with toileting resistance in only children with DD (all p <= 0.05). CONCLUSION: Evaluating gastrointestinal issues, developmental delays, and social deficits before toileting training may help identify children with atypical development who are likely to present with toileting resistance. These evaluations can be incorporated into health supervision visits.
35170295|a|INTRODUCTION: MMR vaccine is a controversial topic of public debate. The controversies include such issues as autism, adjuvants or ethical questions related to the culturing of the rubella virus on human cell lines. OBJECTIVE: The objective was to characterise the public debate on MMR vaccination on the Polish Internet between January 2018 and June 2020. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Quantitative and qualitative analysis of Polish-language online content between 1 January 2018 and 30 June 2020 related to MMR vaccination. The quantitative analysis comprised all available mentions of MMR vaccination in postings (n=14,632), while qualitative analysis relied on a systematic sample of 819 mentions. RESULTS: Quantitative study: 79.6% of MMR vaccine-related postings were published on Facebook, 6.9% on Twitter, and the remaining 14.6% appeared on other websites. There were two surges in posting count in November 2018 and March 2019. Qualitative study: 48% of postings expressed anti-vaccination sentiment, 33% were pro-vaccination and 19% were neutral. CONCLUSIONS: The social media play a significant role in the dissemination of untrue medical claims regarding MMR vaccination. A substantial part of the discussion about MMR vaccination in Poland takes place on Facebook. Despite the general availability of research results stating the absence of a link between autism and vaccination, this is an ongoing most frequent topics in the MMR debate. At the same time, more postings on that topic expressed pro-vaccination rather than anti-vaccination sentiment.
35170247|a|AIM: The purpose of the study is to evaluate the effectiveness of sodium bicarbonate and zinc chloride mouthwashes on oral mucositis and quality of life in patients undergoing chemotherapy. DESIGN: The present study was a randomized controlled trial study. METHODS: One hundred forty-four patients with a cancer diagnosis were randomly assigned into three groups: sodium bicarbonate mouthwash (n = 48), zinc chloride mouthwash (n = 48) and placebo group (n = 48). The severity of mucositis and quality of life were examined blindly at the baseline and 3-week follow-up. RESULTS: The grade of oral mucositis decreased at the end of the third weeks in the sodium bicarbonate and zinc chloride groups rather than the placebo group (p < .001). The severity of oral mucositis in the sodium bicarbonate and zinc chloride groups decreased from end of the first week until third week (p < .001). In addition, there was significant difference in the severity of oral mucositis among the groups at the end of the second (p = .014) and the third weeks (p < .001). Also, there was a statistically significant difference in quality of life scores between the sodium bicarbonate and zinc chloride mouthwash with the placebo group (p < .001). CONCLUSION: Zinc chloride and sodium bicarbonate mouthwashes were effective in treating and reducing the severity of oral mucositis, and subsequently improving quality of life in patients with cancer under chemotherapy. Therefore, we can recommend zinc chloride and sodium bicarbonate at the beginning of chemotherapy to improve oral health and promoting quality of life in these patients.
35169779|a|Background  Autism is one of the most complex, heterogeneous neurological disorders. It is characterized mainly by abnormal communication, impaired social interaction, and restricted behaviors. Prevalence of autism is not clear in Indian population. Aim  The present study hypothesized that Y chromosome plays role in sex bias of autism in Indian autistic population. To investigate our hypothesis, we underwent genetic analysis of neuroligin 4Y [ NLGN4Y ] gene by sequencing 85 male autistic children after screening large population of 1,870 mentally ill children from North Karnataka region of India. Result  Detailed sequencing of the single targeted gene revealed nine variants including, one novel missense mutation and eight synonymous variants; this accounts for 88.9% of synonymous variants. A single novel missense mutation is predicted to be nonpathogenic on the functions of neuroligin4Y protein but it slightly affects the local configuration by altering the original structure of a protein by changing charge and size of amino acid. Conclusion  Probably NLGN4Y gene may not be the risk factor for autism in male children in Indian autistic population. Functional analysis was an important limitation of our study. Therefore, detailed functional analysis is necessary to determine the exact role of novel missense mutation of neuroligin 4Y [ NLGN4Y ] gene especially in the male predominance of autism in Indian autistic population.
35169411|a|Creatine transporter deficiency is an X-linked genetic disorder caused by a variant in the SLC6A8 gene located on the X chromosome (Xq28). This condition varies in severity with features often including intellectual disabilities, speech delay, autistic features, attention deficit hyperactivity and gastrointestinal issues. While creatine transporter deficiency primarily affects males, females may also demonstrate severe phenotypes. However, screening of creatine transporter deficiency in females can be especially difficult as urine creatine/creatinine screenings often have values falling within normative ranges. Also, females may not demonstrate the characteristic reduction of creatine concentrations in the brain visualized with in vivo proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Identification typically results from exome sequencing. In this report, we present the clinical, imaging, and spectroscopy features of a heterozygous female with a severe presentation of creatine transporter deficiency.
35168652|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) involves complex genetics interacting with the perinatal environment, complicating the discovery of common genetic risk. The epigenetic layer of DNA methylation shows dynamic developmental changes and molecular memory of in utero experiences, particularly in placenta, a fetal tissue discarded at birth. However, current array-based methods to identify novel ASD risk genes lack coverage of the most structurally and epigenetically variable regions of the human genome. RESULTS: We use whole genome bisulfite sequencing in placenta samples from prospective ASD studies to discover a previously uncharacterized ASD risk gene, LOC105373085, renamed NHIP. Out of 134 differentially methylated regions associated with ASD in placental samples, a cluster at 22q13.33 corresponds to a 118-kb hypomethylated block that replicates in two additional cohorts. Within this locus, NHIP is functionally characterized as a nuclear peptide-encoding transcript with high expression in brain, and increased expression following neuronal differentiation or hypoxia, but decreased expression in ASD placenta and brain. NHIP overexpression increases cellular proliferation and alters expression of genes regulating synapses and neurogenesis, overlapping significantly with known ASD risk genes and NHIP-associated genes in ASD brain. A common structural variant disrupting the proximity of NHIP to a fetal brain enhancer is associated with NHIP expression and methylation levels and ASD risk, demonstrating a common genetic influence. CONCLUSIONS: Together, these results identify and initially characterize a novel environmentally responsive ASD risk gene relevant to brain development in a hitherto under-characterized region of the human genome.
35168407|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Living with undiagnosed autism can be distressing and may affect mental health. A diagnosis of autism can help self-awareness and self-understanding. However, it can be difficult for adults to access an autism assessment. Clinicians also sometimes find it hard to identify autism in adults. This may mean an autism diagnosis is delayed or missed. In this study, we asked autistic adults, relatives and clinicians how to improve this. The study was in two stages. In the first stage (stage 1), 343 autistic adults and 45 relatives completed a survey. In the survey, we asked questions about people's experiences of UK autism assessment services for adults. Thirty-five clinicians completed a similar survey. Clinicians reported that some autism assessment teams lacked key professionals, for example, psychologists and occupational therapists. We used the information from the three separate surveys to create 13 statements describing best autism assessment services for adults. In stage 2, we asked clinicians for their views on the 13 statements. Clinicians agreed with 11 of the statements. Some autistic adults, relatives and clinicians were positive about autism assessment services, and many also described areas that could be improved. The study findings can be used to improve UK adult autism assessment services and may be helpful for service developments worldwide.
35168392|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Autistic people are believed to have emotions that are too negative and not positive enough, starting early in life. Their facial expressions are also persistently judged to be unusual, as reflected in criteria used to identify autism. But it is possible that common autistic facial expressions are poorly understood by observers, as suggested by a range of findings from research. Another issue is that autistic emotions have always been assessed in contexts suited to non-autistics. In our study, the facial expressions of young autistic and typical children were rated as positive, negative, neutral, or "unknown"-a category we created for emotions that observers notice but do not understand. These emotions were assessed using a context suited to autistic children, including objects of potential interest to them. We found that in this context, autistic and typical children did not differ in positive, negative, or neutral facial emotions. They did differ in unknown emotions, which were found only in autistic children. We also found that repetitive behaviors in autistic children co-occurred with positive, neutral, and unknown emotions, but not with negative emotions. In a context which suits their characteristics, autistic children do not show emotions that are too negative or not positive enough. They do show emotions perceived as unknown, which means we need to improve our understanding of their full emotional repertoire.
35167846|a|Neurodevelopmental disorders are characterized by relatively early onset, with temporal variations across conditions. These lifelong conditions lead to social and communication impairments, and cognitive deficits. In recent years, the importance of biological sex as a vital factor determining behavioural and cognitive vulnerability has been substantiated with a direct impact on both diagnosis and therapeutic response. Several theories have been raised as an attempt to explain psychiatric sex bias. These include the extreme male brain theory, female protective effect, maternal stress, and perinatal inflammation. Here, we address this issue in the context of three important neurodevelopmental disorders where male bias exists into variable extents: autism spectrum disorder (ASD), attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and schizophrenia (SCZ). Sex differences in behaviour and brain organization are reviewed both for patient and animal research, in the context of molecular theories that may explain differential disease vulnerability. Accumulating evidence suggests a complex mechanistic scenario, with genetic predisposition and endocrine and environmental factors as interacting components governing disease onset, progression, and severity.
35167845|a|Susceptibility to psychiatric disorders seems to be influenced by environmental disturbances throughout all stages of life. Epigenetics is described as a key "bridge" between gene and environment, shaping gene expression and phenotype in response to environmental influences. For a long time, it was believed the epigenetic information could not be transmitted from one generation to the next however, recent evidence has demonstrated that these acquired changes can be transmitted across generations in different species, with implications also for humans. The emerging evidence of epigenetic inheritance mechanisms is changing the concept of how and what information can be transferred across generations, rising as a promising theory to explain how psychiatric-related information can be inherited. In this review, we will discuss the main theory about epigenetic inheritance, present clinical evidence of its potential role in major psychiatric disorders, and how studies with patients and animal models have helped describe the epigenetic mechanisms and possible targets underlying this process in schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety, substance use disorder and autism.
35166683|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a widespread neurodevelopmental condition with a range of potential causes and symptoms. Standard diagnostic mechanisms for ASD, which involve lengthy parent questionnaires and clinical observation, often result in long waiting times for results. Recent advances in computer vision and mobile technology hold potential for speeding up the diagnostic process by enabling computational analysis of behavioral and social impairments from home videos. Such techniques can improve objectivity and contribute quantitatively to the diagnostic process. OBJECTIVE: In this work, we evaluate whether home videos collected from a game-based mobile app can be used to provide diagnostic insights into ASD. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study attempting to identify potential social indicators of ASD from mobile phone videos without the use of eye-tracking hardware, manual annotations, and structured scenarios or clinical environments. METHODS: Here, we used a mobile health app to collect over 11 hours of video footage depicting 95 children engaged in gameplay in a natural home environment. We used automated data set annotations to analyze two social indicators that have previously been shown to differ between children with ASD and their neurotypical (NT) peers: (1) gaze fixation patterns, which represent regions of an individual's visual focus and (2) visual scanning methods, which refer to the ways in which individuals scan their surrounding environment. We compared the gaze fixation and visual scanning methods used by children during a 90-second gameplay video to identify statistically significant differences between the 2 cohorts; we then trained a long short-term memory (LSTM) neural network to determine if gaze indicators could be predictive of ASD. RESULTS: Our results show that gaze fixation patterns differ between the 2 cohorts; specifically, we could identify 1 statistically significant region of fixation (P<.001). In addition, we also demonstrate that there are unique visual scanning patterns that exist for individuals with ASD when compared to NT children (P<.001). A deep learning model trained on coarse gaze fixation annotations demonstrates mild predictive power in identifying ASD. CONCLUSIONS: Ultimately, our study demonstrates that heterogeneous video data sets collected from mobile devices hold potential for quantifying visual patterns and providing insights into ASD. We show the importance of automated labeling techniques in generating large-scale data sets while simultaneously preserving the privacy of participants, and we demonstrate that specific social engagement indicators associated with ASD can be identified and characterized using such data.
35166201|a|BACKGROUND: Autism and autistic traits are risk factors for suicidal behaviour. AIMS: To explore the prevalence of autism (diagnosed and undiagnosed) in those who died by suicide, and identify risk factors for suicide in this group. METHOD: Stage 1: 372 coroners' inquest records, covering the period 1 January 2014 to 31 December 2017 from two regions of England, were analysed for evidence that the person who died had diagnosed autism or undiagnosed possible autism (elevated autistic traits), and identified risk markers. Stage 2: 29 follow-up interviews with the next of kin of those who died gathered further evidence of autism and autistic traits using validated autism screening and diagnostic tools. RESULTS: Stage 1: evidence of autism (10.8%) was significantly higher in those who died by suicide than the 1.1% prevalence expected in the UK general alive population (odds ratio (OR) = 11.08, 95% CI 3.92-31.31). Stage 2: 5 (17.2%) of the follow-up sample had evidence of autism identified from the coroners' records in stage 1. We identified evidence of undiagnosed possible autism in an additional 7 (24.1%) individuals, giving a total of 12 (41.4%); significantly higher than expected in the general alive population (1.1%) (OR = 19.76, 95% CI 2.36-165.84). Characteristics of those who died were largely similar regardless of evidence of autism, with groups experiencing a comparably high number of multiple risk markers before they died. CONCLUSIONS: Elevated autistic traits are significantly over-represented in those who die by suicide.
35165976|a|Heterozygous pathogenic variants in CIC, which encodes a transcriptional repressor, have been identified in individuals with neurodevelopmental phenotypes. To date, 11 CIC variants have been associated with the CIC-related neurodevelopmental syndrome. Here, we describe three novel and one previously reported CIC variants in four individuals with neurodevelopmental delay. Notably, we report for the first time a de novo frameshift variant specific to the long isoform of CIC (CIC-L, NM_001304815.1:c.1100dup, p.Pro368AlafsTer16) in an individual with speech delay, intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder. Our investigation into the function of CIC-L reveals that partial loss of CIC-L leads transcriptional de-repression of CIC target genes. We also describe a missense variant (NM_015125.3:c.683G>A, p.Arg228Gln) in an individual with a history of speech delay and relapsed pre-B acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Functional studies of this variant suggest a partial loss of CIC transcriptional repressor activity. Our study expands the list of CIC pathogenic variants and contributes to the accumulating evidence that CIC haploinsufficiency or partial loss of function is a pathogenic mechanism causing neurodevelopmental phenotypes. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
35165798|a|The first aim of this study was to construct/validate a subscale-with cut-offs considering gender/age differences-for the school-age Child Behavior CheckList (CBCL) to screen for Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) applying both data-driven (N = 1666) and clinician-expert (N = 15) approaches. Further, we compared these to previously established CBCL ASD profiles/subscales and DSM-oriented subscales. The second aim was to cross-validate results in two truly independent samples (N = 2445 and 886). Despite relatively low discriminative power of all subscales in the cross-validation samples, results indicated that the data-driven subscale had the best potential to screen for ASD and a similar screening potential as the DSM-oriented subscales. Given beneficial implications for pediatric/clinical practice, we encourage colleagues to continue the validation of this CBCL ASD subscale.
35165451|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is defined by hallmark behaviors involving reduced communication and social interaction as well as repetitive activities and restricted interests. ASD represents a broad spectrum, from minimally affected individuals to those requiring intense support, with additional manifestations often including anxiety, irritability/aggression and altered sensory processing. Gastrointestinal (GI) issues are also common in ASD, and studies have identified changes in the gut microbiome of individuals with ASD compared to control populations, complementing recent findings of differences in gut-derived metabolites in feces and circulation. However, a role for the GI tract or microbiome in ASD remains controversial. Here we report that an oral GI-restricted adsorbent (AB-2004) that has affinity for small aromatic or phenolic molecules relieves anxiety-like behaviors that are driven by a gut microbial metabolite in mice. Accordingly, a pilot human study was designed and completed to evaluate the safety of AB-2004 in an open-label, single-cohort, multiple-ascending-dose clinical trial that enrolled 30 adolescents with ASD and GI symptoms in New Zealand and Australia. AB-2004 was shown to have good safety and tolerability across all dose levels, and no drug-related serious adverse events were identified. Significant reductions in specific urinary and plasma levels of gut bacterial metabolites were observed between baseline and end of AB-2004 treatment, demonstrating likely target engagement. Furthermore, we observed improvements in multiple exploratory behavioral endpoints, most significantly in post hoc analysis of anxiety and irritability, as well as GI health, after 8 weeks of treatment. These results from an open-label study (trial registration no. ACTRN12618001956291) suggest that targeting gut-derived metabolites with an oral adsorbent is a safe and well-tolerated approach to improving symptoms associated with ASD, thereby emboldening larger placebo-controlled trials.
35165191|a|FOXP1 syndrome caused by haploinsufficiency of the forkhead box protein P1 (FOXP1) gene is a neurodevelopmental disorder that manifests motor dysfunction, intellectual disability, autism, and language impairment. In this study, we used a Foxp1 +/- mouse model to address whether cognitive and motor deficits in FOXP1 syndrome are associated with mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress. Here, we show that genes with a role in mitochondrial biogenesis and dynamics (e.g., Foxo1, Pgc-1alpha, Tfam, Opa1, and Drp1) were dysregulated in the striatum of Foxp1 +/- mice at different postnatal stages. Furthermore, these animals exhibit a reduced mitochondrial membrane potential and complex I activity, as well as decreased expression of the antioxidants superoxide dismutase 2 (Sod2) and glutathione (GSH), resulting in increased oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation. These features can explain the reduced neurite branching, learning and memory, endurance, and motor coordination that we observed in these animals. Taken together, we provide strong evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction in Foxp1 +/- mice, suggesting that insufficient energy supply and excessive oxidative stress underlie the cognitive and motor impairment in FOXP1 deficiency.
35165029|a|PURPOSE: We surveyed healthcare providers to determine the extent to which they discuss transition-to-adulthood topics with autistic patients without intellectual disabilities. METHODS: Seventy-four healthcare providers in the Philadelphia area reported on the patient age at which they begin transition conversations, topics covered, and provider comfort. We calculated the proportion of providers who endorsed each transition topic, overall and by clinical setting. RESULTS: Providers initiated transition-related conversations at a median age of 16 years (IQR: 14, 18), with over half reporting they were "somewhat" or "a little" comfortable with discussions. Nearly all providers discussed at least one healthcare, well-being, and mental health topic, while basic need-related discussions were limited. DISCUSSION: Results suggest providers may delay and feel poorly prepared to provide anticipatory guidance to autistic patients for transition to adulthood. Future efforts to enhance the available resources and preparation available to providers are essential to meet autistic patients' needs.
35164888|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a highly heterogeneous disorder that affects nearly 1 in 189 females and 1 in 42 males. However, the neurobiological basis of gender differences in ASD is poorly understood, as most studies have neglected females and used methods ill-suited to capture such differences. AIMS: To identify robust functional brain organisation markers that distinguish between females and males with ASD and predict symptom severity. METHOD: We leveraged multiple neuroimaging cohorts (ASD n = 773) and developed a novel spatiotemporal deep neural network (stDNN), which uses spatiotemporal convolution on functional magnetic resonance imaging data to distinguish between groups. RESULTS: stDNN achieved consistently high classification accuracy in distinguishing between females and males with ASD. Notably, stDNN trained to distinguish between females and males with ASD could not distinguish between neurotypical females and males, suggesting that there are gender differences in the functional brain organisation in ASD that differ from normative gender differences. Brain features associated with motor, language and visuospatial attentional systems reliably distinguished between females and males with ASD. Crucially, these results were observed in a large multisite cohort and replicated in a fully independent cohort. Furthermore, brain features associated with the motor network's primary motor cortex node predicted the severity of restricted/repetitive behaviours in females but not in males with ASD. CONCLUSIONS: Our replicable findings reveal that the brains of females and males with ASD are functionally organised differently, contributing to their clinical symptoms in distinct ways. They inform the development of gender-specific diagnoses and treatment strategies for ASD, and ultimately advance precision psychiatry.
35164862|a|BACKGROUND: Autistic adults, particularly women, are more likely to experience chronic ill health than the general population. Central sensitivity syndromes (CSS) are a group of related conditions that are thought to include an underlying sensitisation of the central nervous system; heightened sensory sensitivity is a common feature. Anecdotal evidence suggests autistic adults may be more prone to developing a CSS. This study aimed to investigate the occurrence of CSS diagnoses and symptoms in autistic adults, and to explore whether CSS symptoms were related to autistic traits, mental health, sensory sensitivity, or gender. METHODS: The full sample of participants included 973 autistic adults (410 men, 563 women, mean age = 44.6) registered at the Netherlands Autism Register, who completed questionnaires assessing autistic traits, sensory sensitivity, CSS, physical and mental health symptoms. The reliability and validity of the Central Sensitization Inventory (CSI) in an autistic sample was established using exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses. Chi2 analyses, independent t-tests, hierarchical regression and path analysis were used to analyse relationships between CSS symptoms, autistic traits, measures of mental health and wellbeing, sensory sensitivity, age and gender. RESULTS: 21% of participants reported one or more CSS diagnosis, and 60% scored at or above the clinical cut-off for a CSS. Autistic women were more likely to report a CSS diagnosis and experienced more CSS symptoms than men. Sensory sensitivity, anxiety, age and gender were significant predictors of CSS symptoms, with sensory sensitivity and anxiety fully mediating the relationship between autistic traits and CSS symptoms. LIMITATIONS: Although this study included a large sample of autistic adults, we did not have a control group or a CSS only group. We also could not include a non-binary group due to lack of statistical power. CONCLUSIONS: CSS diagnoses and symptoms appear to be very common in the autistic population. Increased awareness of an association between autism and central sensitisation should inform clinicians and guide diagnostic practice, particularly for women where CSS are common and autism under recognised.
35164690|a|BACKGROUND: Retinoic acid-related orphan receptor alpha (RORA) has been reported to be suppressed in autistic patients and is associated with autism spectrum disorders (ASD), although the potential role and mechanism of RORA on gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms in ASD patients is still not reported. In this study, we aim to investigate the contribution of RORA to GI symptoms through a maternal diabetes-mediated autism-like mouse model. RESULTS: Male offspring of diabetic dams were treated with either superoxide dismutase (SOD) mimetic MnTBAP or RORA agonist SR1078, or were crossbred with intestine epithelial cells (IEC)-specific RORA knockout (RORA-/-) mouse. Gene expression, oxidative stress and inflammation were measured in brain tissues, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and IEC, and GI symptoms were evaluated. Our results showed that SOD mimetic MnTBAP completely, while RORA agonist SR1078 partly, reversed maternal diabetes-mediated oxidative stress and inflammation in the brain, PBMC and IEC, as well as GI symptoms, including intestine permeability and altered gut microbiota compositions. IEC-specific RORA deficiency either mimicked or worsened maternal diabetes-mediated GI symptoms as well as oxidative stress and inflammation in IEC, while there was little effect on maternal diabetes-mediated autism-like behaviors. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that RORA suppression contributes to maternal diabetes-mediated GI symptoms in autism-like mouse offspring, this study provides a potential therapeutical target for maternal diabetes-mediated GI symptoms in offspring through RORA activation.
35163292|a|An estimated 60 million people worldwide suffer from epilepsy, half of whom are women. About one-third of women with epilepsy are of childbearing age. The childbirth rate in women with epilepsy is about 20-40% lower compared to that of the general population, which may be partly due to a lower number of these women being in relationships. Lower fertility in women with epilepsy may be linked to the disease itself, but it is mainly a result of the treatment provided. Valproate, as an antiepileptic drug inhibiting histone deacetylases, may affect the expression of genes associated with cell cycle control and cellular differentiation. Evidently, this drug is associated with the risk of malformations although other antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) may also trigger birth defects, however, to a lower degree. Valproate (and to a certain degree other AEDs) may induce autism spectrum disorders and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. The main mechanism responsible for all negative effects of prenatal exposure to valproate seems inhibition of histone deacetylases. Animal studies show a reduction in the expression of genes involved in social behavior and an increase in hippocampal cytokines. Valproate-induced oxidative stress may also contribute to neural tube defects. Interestingly, paternal exposure to this AED in mice may trigger neurodevelopmental disorders as well although a population-based cohort study does not confirm this effect. To lower the risk of congenital malformations and neurodevelopmental disorders, a single AED at the optimal dose and supplementation with folic acid is recommended. VPA should be avoided in women of childbearing age and especially during pregnancy.
35163286|a|The high prevalence of gastrointestinal (GI) disorders among autism spectrum disorder (ASD) patients has prompted scientists to look into the gut microbiota as a putative trigger in ASD pathogenesis. Thus, many studies have linked the gut microbial dysbiosis that is frequently observed in ASD patients with the modulation of brain function and social behavior, but little is known about this connection and its contribution to the etiology of ASD. This present review highlights the potential role of the microbiota-gut-brain axis in autism. In particular, it focuses on how gut microbiota dysbiosis may impact gut permeability, immune function, and the microbial metabolites in autistic people. We further discuss recent findings supporting the possible role of the gut microbiome in initiating epigenetic modifications and consider the potential role of this pathway in influencing the severity of ASD. Lastly, we summarize recent updates in microbiota-targeted therapies such as probiotics, prebiotics, dietary supplements, fecal microbiota transplantation, and microbiota transfer therapy. The findings of this paper reveal new insights into possible therapeutic interventions that may be used to reduce and cure ASD-related symptoms. However, well-designed research studies using large sample sizes are still required in this area of study.
35163142|a|Adenosine exerts an important role in the modulation of central nervous system (CNS) activity. Through the interaction with four G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) subtypes, adenosine subtly regulates neurotransmission, interfering with the dopaminergic, glutamatergic, noradrenergic, serotoninergic, and endocannabinoid systems. The inhibitory and facilitating actions of adenosine on neurotransmission are mainly mediated by A1 and A2A adenosine receptors (ARs), respectively. Given their role in the CNS, ARs are promising therapeutic targets for neuropsychiatric disorders where altered neurotransmission represents the most likely etiological hypothesis. Activating or blocking ARs with specific pharmacological agents could therefore restore the balance of altered neurotransmitter systems, providing the rationale for the potential treatment of these highly debilitating conditions. In this review, we summarize and discuss the most relevant studies concerning AR modulation in psychotic and mood disorders such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorders, depression, and anxiety, as well as neurodevelopment disorders such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD), fragile X syndrome (FXS), attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and neuropsychiatric aspects of neurodegenerative disorders.
35162512|a|Including students with neurodevelopmental disabilities (NDDs) in regular classrooms has become a law-enforced common practice in many high- and middle-income countries. Still, without appropriate actions supporting the implementation of inclusive pedagogical practice, students with NDDs remain at increased risk for absenteeism, bullying and underachievement. There is limited knowledge on the feasibility of social skills group training (SSGT) in naturalistic settings. Using a qualitative approach, the objective of this study was to explore the lived experiences of (i) students diagnosed with autism or attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and those showing subclinical social difficulties receiving either SSGT or active social control activities in a regular senior high school setting, (ii) teachers providing SSGT or the active control activity and (iii) school leaders facilitating the implementation of these actions. Due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, comparison between real life versus digital administration of SSGT was also examined. Within a randomized controlled pilot trial of the school-tailored SSGT SKOLKONTAKT , the primary perspectives of 20 students, teachers and school leaders on SSGT or the social control activities were explored. All groups perceived SSGT to enhance school attendance and academic achievement of students, as well as teacher inclusion skills and the social school climate. Findings indicate that SSGT is largely feasible and socially valid, and broader implementation of SSGT in school settings appears meaningful.
35162492|a|Diagnoses of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are typically accompanied by atypical language development, which can be noticeable even before diagnosis. The siblings of children diagnosed with ASD are at elevated likelihood for ASD diagnosis and have been shown to have higher prevalence rates than the general population. In this paper, we systematically reviewed studies looking at the vocabulary size and development of infants with autism. One inclusion criterion was that infants were grouped either pre-diagnostically as elevated or typical likelihood or post-diagnostically as ASD or without ASD. This review focused on studies that tested infants up to 24 months of age and that assessed vocabulary either via the parent-completed MacArthur-Bates Communicative Developmental Inventory (CDI) or the clinician-administered Mullen Scales of Early Learning (MSEL). Our systematic search yielded 76 studies. A meta-analysis was performed on these studies that compared the vocabulary scores of EL and TL infants pre-diagnostically and the scores of ASD and non-ASD infants post-diagnostically. Both pre- and post-diagnostically, it was found that the EL and ASD infants had smaller vocabularies than their TL and non-ASD peers, respectively. The effect sizes across studies were heterogenous, prompting additional moderator analyses of age and sub-group analyses of the language measure used (CDI or MSEL) as potential moderators of the effect size. Age was found to be a moderator both in the pre- and post-diagnostical groups, however, language measure was not a moderator in either diagnostic group. Interpretations and future research directions are discussed based on these findings.
35162336|a|We review the reasons for the greater male predominance in the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder in the non-intellectual disabled population and compare it to autism diagnosed in intellectually disabled individuals. Accurate and timely diagnosis is important, as it reduces health inequalities. Females often present later for the diagnosis. The differences are in core features, such as in social reciprocal interaction through 'camouflaging' and restricted repetitive behaviours, that are less noticeable in females and are potentially explained by the biological differences (female protective effect theory) and/or differences in presentation between the two sexes (female autism phenotype theory). Females more often present with internalising co-occurring conditions than males. We review these theories, highlighting the key differences and the impact of a diagnosis on females. We review methods to potentially improve diagnosis in females along with current and future management strategies.
35162290|a|While the COVID-19 pandemic is ongoing, early outcome studies indicate severe and pervasive global effects of the pandemic and associated measures to prevent the spread of the virus. General population studies, as well as insight into the outcomes for particular groups, will be necessary in order to mitigate potentially long-term effects as well as to prepare for future epidemics or pandemics. The pandemic conditions have been marked by rapid and abrupt changes and unpredictability which are circumstances that leave the autistic population particularly vulnerable to adverse outcomes following the distinctive features of the diagnosis. Studies are only beginning to delineate the outcomes of the global autism community and the present study adds to these findings by providing a local, multi-perspective, qualitative analysis of the lived experiences of the Swedish autism community. In this study, autistic youth and adults, caregivers of autistic individuals, as well as representatives of Swedish interest organizations were interviewed. Thematic analysis was performed on the population as a whole and patterns of results were formalized according to the International Classification of Function, Disability and Health (ICF-CY). Participants report wide-ranging adverse outcomes of the pandemic relating to mental health and access to support, participation in daily activities and socialization, education, and work as well as parental resources. However, participants also report positive outcomes relating to a reduction in specific social and everyday demands, and normalization of lived experiences. Additionally, interviews outlined some strategies used to cope during pandemic conditions. Implications of these findings are discussed.
35162210|a|This path analysis of mothers of children with autism aimed to investigate the relationship between maternal burnout and the mother's subjective reporting of difficulty in childcare, family function, and personality traits. A total of 410 mothers of children with autism (mean age 39.03, SD 7.42) completed four questionnaires: Parental Burnout Measure (PBM-12), International Personality Item Pool-Big Five Markers (IPIP-BFM-20), Flexibility and Cohesion Evaluation Scales (FACES-IV), and a survey on childcare difficulties. Path analysis using two predetermined models was used to examine the interrelations. Both models fit the empirical data equally with a Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA) index of 0.000 and a 90% confidence interval (model 1: 0.000-0.052; model 2: 0.000-0.059). Path analysis revealed similar fit indexes for both models: (a) burnout is a mediator between exogenous variables and family functioning, and (b) family functioning is an indirect mediator between exogenous variables and burnout. These findings suggest that increased maternal emotional instability (neuroticism) and conscientiousness can lead to increased family communication problems, which may further lead to a breakdown of the equilibrium in the family system, resulting in the mother's dissatisfaction with family life and a consequent increased risk of maternal burnout.
35161995|a|For people with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), using technological tools, such as augmented reality (AR) and serious games remain a new and unexplored option. To attract people with ASD who have communicative, social, emotional and attention deficit disorders to behavioral treatments, an attractive environment is needed that ensures continuity during treatment. The aim of the current work is to efficiently examine systematic reviews and relevant primary studies on ASD solutions from 2015 to 2020, particularly those using the traditional Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS), the application of augmented reality and those that propose serious games, thereby providing an overview of existing evidence and to identify strategies for future research. Five databases were searched for keywords that may be included within the broad Autism Spectrum Disorder 'ASD' umbrella term, alongside 'augmented reality', 'serious games' and 'PECS'. We screened 1799 titles and abstracts, read, and retained 12 reviews and 43 studies. The studies scrutinized in our systematic review were examined to answer four primary and four sub-research questions, which we formulated to better understand general trends in the use of approaches for attracting people with ASD to behavioral therapies. Additionally, our systematic review also presents ongoing issues in this area of research and suggests promising future research directions. Our review is useful to researchers in this field as it facilitates the comparison of existing studies with work currently being conducted, based on the availability of a wide range of studies in three different areas (AR, SG and PECS).
35161697|a|Recent studies have shown that children with autism may be interested in playing with an interactive robot. Moreover, the robot can engage these children in ways that demonstrate essential aspects of human interaction, guiding them in therapeutic sessions to practice more complex forms of interaction found in social human-to-human interactions. We review published articles on robot-assisted autism therapy (RAAT) to understand the trends in research on this type of therapy for children with autism and to provide practitioners and researchers with insights and possible future directions in the field. Specifically, we analyze 38 articles, all of which are refereed journal articles, that were indexed on Web of Science from 2009 onward, and discuss the distribution of the articles by publication year, article type, database and journal, research field, robot type, participant age range, and target behaviors. Overall, the results show considerable growth in the number of journal publications on RAAT, reflecting increased interest in the use of robot technology in autism therapy as a salient and legitimate research area. Factors, such as new advances in artificial intelligence techniques and machine learning, have spurred this growth.
35160030|a|Thyroid dysfunction and toxic metal exposure have been linked to the increased risk of autism spectrum disorders (ASD); however, the relationship between those factors remains unclear. We aimed to evaluate the relationship between the serum level of hormones, namely thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), free triiodothyronine (fT3), free thyroxine (fT4), and urinary cadmium (U-Cd) and urinary manganese (U-Mn), in patients with ASD. The study group consisted of 129 adolescents with ASD, and the control group consisted of 86 healthy persons. Ion chromatography with spectrophotometric detection (IC-UV/ViS) was used to quantitatively determine Cd and Mn in all 24-h urine samples. These results indicate that severity of certain symptoms in autism is associated with thyroid function. Correlation analysis between Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) results and the content of both U-Mn and U-Cd as well as fT3, fT4 and TSH values in ASD patients showed significantly positive correlation of CARS7 (visual reaction) with fT3 and fT4 and a negative correlation with TSH for the whole study group. In the group of adolescents over 14 years of age, it was also observed that CARS10 (anxiety reaction) negatively correlates with serum TSH levels, and among younger individuals, CARS9 (near receptor responsiveness, taste, smell) positively correlates with TSH.
35159260|a|Excitatory-inhibitory imbalance (E/I) is a fundamental mechanism underlying autism spectrum disorders (ASD). TRIM32 is a risk gene genetically associated with ASD. The absence of TRIM32 causes impaired generation of inhibitory GABAergic interneurons, neural network hyperexcitability, and autism-like behavior in mice, emphasizing the role of TRIM32 in maintaining E/I balance, but despite the description of TRIM32 in regulating proliferation and differentiation of cultured mouse neural progenitor cells (NPCs), the role of TRIM32 in cerebral cortical development, particularly in the production of excitatory pyramidal neurons, remains unknown. The present study observed that TRIM32 deficiency resulted in decreased numbers of distinct layer-specific cortical neurons and decreased radial glial cell (RGC) and intermediate progenitor cell (IPC) pool size. We further demonstrated that TRIM32 deficiency impairs self-renewal of RGCs and IPCs as indicated by decreased proliferation and mitosis. A TRIM32 deficiency also affects or influences the formation of cortical neurons. As a result, TRIM32-deficient mice showed smaller brain size. At the molecular level, RNAseq analysis indicated reduced Notch signalling in TRIM32-deficient mice. Therefore, the present study indicates a role for TRIM32 in pyramidal neuron generation. Impaired generation of excitatory pyramidal neurons may explain the hyperexcitability observed in TRIM32-deficient mice.
35159205|a|GABA depolarizes and often excites immature neurons in all animal species and brain structures investigated due to a developmentally regulated reduction in intracellular chloride concentration ([Cl-]i) levels. The control of [Cl-]i levels is mediated by the chloride cotransporters NKCC1 and KCC2, the former usually importing chloride and the latter exporting it. The GABA polarity shift has been extensively validated in several experimental conditions using often the NKCC1 chloride importer antagonist bumetanide. In spite of an intrinsic heterogeneity, this shift is abolished in many experimental conditions associated with developmental disorders including autism, Rett syndrome, fragile X syndrome, or maternal immune activation. Using bumetanide, an EMA- and FDA-approved agent, many clinical trials have shown promising results with the expected side effects. Kaila et al. have repeatedly challenged these experimental and clinical observations. Here, we reply to the recent reviews by Kaila et al. stressing that the GABA polarity shift is solidly accepted by the scientific community as a major discovery to understand brain development and that bumetanide has shown promising effects in clinical trials.
35158305|a|Sleep disturbances (SD) accompany many neurodevelopmental disorders, suggesting SD is a transdiagnostic process that can account for behavioral deficits and influence underlying neuropathogenesis. Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) comprises a complex set of neurodevelopmental conditions characterized by challenges in social interaction, communication, and restricted, repetitive behaviors. Diagnosis of ASD is based primarily on behavioral criteria, and there are no drugs that target core symptoms. Among the co-occurring conditions associated with ASD, SD are one of the most prevalent. SD often arises before the onset of other ASD symptoms. Sleep interventions improve not only sleep but also daytime behaviors in children with ASD. Here, we examine sleep phenotypes in multiple model systems relevant to ASD, e.g., mice, zebrafish, fruit flies and worms. Given the functions of sleep in promoting brain connectivity, neural plasticity, emotional regulation and social behavior, all of which are of critical importance in ASD pathogenesis, we propose that synaptic dysfunction is a major mechanism that connects ASD and SD. Common molecular targets in this interplay that are involved in synaptic function might be a novel avenue for therapy of individuals with ASD experiencing SD. Such therapy would be expected to improve not only sleep but also other ASD symptoms.
35158285|a|OBJECTIVE: Developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEE) entail moderate to profound communication and other impairments that are poorly measured by typical clinical outcomes assessments (COA). We examined the potential of alternative approaches, specifically, the use of raw scores and COAs outside of their intended age ranges. METHODS: In a cross-sectional survey, 120 parents of children with Dravet Syndrome, Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, KCNQ2-DEE, KCNB1-DEE, and SCN2A-DEE (ages 1-35 years) completed the Adaptive Behavior Assessment System-3 for ages 0-5 years, modified checklist for autism (mCHAT), communication and social behavior scales (CSBS), communication matrix (CM), and several parent-reported classifiers of communication. Adaptive Behavior Assessment System communication and social raw scores were the primary and adjunctive outcomes. Floor and ceiling effects, dispersion and convergence with related measures were assessed with appropriate parametric and nonparametric statistical techniques. RESULTS: Median chronological age (CA) was 8.7 years (Interquartile range (IQR): 5.3-13.5). Adaptive Behavior Assessment Systemcommunication and social age equivalents were 12.5 months (IQR 7.5-28) and 16.5 months (IQR 9-31). Most raw scores corresponded to standardized scores indicating performance <3 standard deviations below the general population mean. Adaptive Behavior Assessment System raw scores demonstrated minimal floor and ceiling effects (<1-2.5%). In linear regression models, scores correlated with age under 6 years (communication, p = 0.001; social, p = 0.003) but significantly flattened out thereafter. Scores varied substantially by DEE group (both p < 0.001) and decreased with higher convulsive seizure frequency (communication, p = 0.01, social, p = 0.02). There was good convergence with mCHAT, CSBS, and CM scores (all r > 0.8). SIGNIFICANCE: Raw scores and out-of-range COAs may provide measures that are sensitive at the very limited levels of functioning typical of profoundly impaired, older patients with DEEs. To ensure that targeted trial outcomes are responsive to meaningful change, development of these approaches will be essential to clinical trial readiness for novel therapies for rare DEEs.
35158117|a|Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) is a collection of complicated neurological disorders that first show in early childhood. Electroencephalogram (EEG) signals are widely used to record the electrical activities of the brain. Manual screening is prone to human errors, tedious, and time-consuming. Hence, a novel automated method involving the Douglas-Peucker (DP) algorithm, sparse coding-based feature mapping approach, and deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) is employed to detect ASD using EEG recordings. Initially, the DP algorithm is used for each channel to reduce the number of samples without degradation of the EEG signal. Then, the EEG rhythms are extracted by using the wavelet transform. The EEG rhythms are coded by using the sparse representation. The matching pursuit algorithm is used for sparse coding of the EEG rhythms. The sparse coded rhythms are segmented into 8 bits length and then converted to decimal numbers. An image is formed by concatenating the histograms of the decimated rhythm signals. Extreme learning machines (ELM)-based autoencoders (AE) are employed at a data augmentation step. After data augmentation, the ASD and healthy EEG signals are classified using pre-trained deep CNN models. Our proposed method yielded an accuracy of 98.88%, the sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 96.4%, and the F1-score of 99.19% in the detection of ASD automatically. Our developed model is ready to be tested with more EEG signals before its clinical application.
35157320|a|Studies of non-autistic individuals and people with an intellectual disability show that contextual information impacts positively on emotion recognition ability, however, this area is not well researched with autistic adults. We investigated this using a static emotion recognition task. Participants completed an emotion recognition task in person or online. In total, 46 autistic participants and 379 non-autistic participants completed the task. A linear mixed model showed that autistic adults had significantly lower accuracy when identifying emotions across all contexts, compared to control participants, even when contextual information was present. No significant effect of context was found in either group, nor was gender shown to be an influential variable. A supplementary analysis showed that higher scores on the Autism-Spectrum Quotient led to lower scores on the emotion recognition task; no effect of context was found here either. This research adds to the limited work investigating the influence of contextual factors in emotion recognition in autistic adults. Overall, it shows that context may not aid emotion recognition in this group in the same way as it does for non-autistic individuals.
35157167|a|The Program for the Education and Enrichment of Relational Skills (PEERS) social skills intervention has demonstrated effectiveness for adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, studies have been limited by a lack of objective outcome measures and an underrepresentation of Latinx families. This pilot study extends the PEERS literature by utilizing an observational measure of conversational skills (Contextual Assessment of Social Skills; CASS) with a diverse sample of 13 adolescents with ASD (with parent groups conducted in English and Spanish simultaneously) and a control group of 11 neurotypical adolescents. Consistent with previous research, adolescents with ASD and their parents perceived improvements in social functioning following intervention, which were maintained four months later and corroborated by improvements in conversational skills.
35157020|a|Importance: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are childhood-onset disorders that may persist into adulthood. Several studies have suggested that they may be associated with an increased risk of mortality; however, the results are inconsistent. Objective: To assess the risk of mortality among persons with ASD or ADHD and their first-degree relatives. Data Sources: A search of MEDLINE, Embase, Scopus, Web of Science, and PsycINFO (published from inception to April 1, 2021) was supplemented by searching reference lists of the retrieved articles. Study Selection: Cohort and case-control studies that reported mortality rate ratios (RRs) in persons with ASD or ADHD and/or their first-degree relatives compared with the general population or those without ASD/ADHD were included. Data Extraction and Synthesis: Screening, data extraction, and quality assessment were performed by at least 2 researchers independently. A random-effects model was used to meta-analyze individual studies and assessed heterogeneity (I2). Main Outcomes and Measures: All-cause mortality in association with ASD or ADHD. Secondary outcome was cause-specific mortality. Results: Twenty-seven studies were included, with a total of 642 260 individuals. All-cause mortality was found to be higher for persons with ASD (154 238 participants; 12 studies; RR, 2.37; 95% CI, 1.97-2.85; I2, 89%; moderate confidence) and persons with ADHD (396 488 participants; 8 studies; RR, 2.13; 95% CI, 1.13-4.02; I2, 98%; low confidence) than for the general population. Among persons with ASD, deaths from natural causes (4 studies; RR, 3.80; 95% CI, 2.06-7.01; I2, 96%; low confidence) and deaths from unnatural causes were increased (6 studies; RR, 2.50; 95% CI, 1.49-4.18; I2, 95%; low confidence). Among persons with ADHD, deaths from natural causes were not significantly increased (4 studies; RR, 1.62; 95% CI, 0.89-2.96; I2, 88%; low confidence), but deaths from unnatural causes were higher than expected (10 studies; RR, 2.81; 95% CI, 1.73-4.55; I2, 92%; low confidence). Conclusions and Relevance: This systematic review and meta-analysis found that ASD and ADHD are associated with a significantly increased risk of mortality. Understanding the mechanisms of these associations may lead to targeted strategies to prevent avoidable deaths in high-risk groups. The substantial heterogeneity between studies should be explored further.
35157011|a|
35155817|a|Background and aims: Prior work has examined how children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder who are minimally verbal use their spoken language abilities during interactions with others. However, social communication includes other aspects beyond speech. To our knowledge, no studies have examined how minimally verbal children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder are using their gestural communication during social interactions. Such work can provide important insights into how gestures may complement their spoken language abilities. Methods: Fifty minimally verbal children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder participated (M age = 12.41 years; 38 males). Gestural communication was coded from the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule. Children (n = 25) and adolescents (n = 25) were compared on their production of gestures, gesture-speech combinations, and communicative functions. Communicative functions were also assessed by the type of communication modality: gesture, speech, and gesture-speech to examine the range of communicative functions across different modalities of communication. To explore the role gestures may play the relation between speech utterances and gestural production was investigated. Results: Analyses revealed that (1) minimally verbal children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder did not differ in their total number of gestures. The most frequently produced gesture across children and adolescents was a reach gesture, followed by a point gesture (deictic gesture), and then conventional gestures. However, adolescents produced more gesture-speech combinations (reinforcing gesture-speech combinations) and displayed a wider range of communicative functions. (2) Overlap was found in the types of communicative functions expressed across different communication modalities. However, requests were conveyed via gesture more frequently compared to speech or gesture-speech. In contrast, dis/agree/acknowledging and responding to a question posed by the conversational partner was expressed more frequently via speech compared to gesture or gesture-speech. (3) The total number of gestures was negatively associated with total speech utterances after controlling for chronological age, receptive communication ability, and nonverbal IQ. Conclusions: Adolescents may be employing different communication strategies to maintain the conversational exchange and to further clarify the message they want to convey to the conversational partner. Although overlap occurred in communicative functions across gesture, speech, and gesture-speech, nuanced differences emerged in how often they were expressed across different modalities of communication. Given their speech production abilities, gestures may play a compensatory role for some individuals with autism spectrum disorder who are minimally verbal. Implications: Findings underscore the importance of assessing multiple modalities of communication to provide a fuller picture of their social communication abilities. Our results identified specific communicative strengths and areas for growth that can be targeted and expanded upon within gesture and speech to optimize social communication development.
35155305|a|Introduction: The emergence of gaming technologies, such as videogames and virtual reality, provides a wide variety of possibilities in intensively and enjoyably performing rehabilitation for children with neurological disorders. Solid evidence-based results are however required to promote the use of different gaming technologies in pediatric neurorehabilitation, while simultaneously exploring new related directions concerning neuro-monitoring and rehabilitation in familiar settings. Aim of the Study and Methods: In order to analyze the state of the art regarding the available gaming technologies for pediatric neurorehabilitation, Scopus and Pubmed Databases have been searched by following: PRISMA statements, PICOs classification, and PEDro scoring. Results: 43 studies have been collected and classified as follows: 11 feasibility studies; six studies proposing home-system solutions; nine studies presenting gamified robotic devices; nine longitudinal intervention trials; and eight reviews. Most of them rely on feasibility or pilot trials characterized by small sample sizes and short durations; different methodologies, outcome assessments and terminologies are involved; the explored spectrum of neurological conditions turns out to be scanty, mainly including the most common and wider debilitating groups of conditions in pediatric neurology: cerebral palsy, brain injuries and autism. Conclusion: Even though it highlights reduced possibilities of drawing evidence-based conclusions due to the above outlined biases, this systematic review raises awareness among pediatricians and other health professionals about gaming technologies. Such a review also points out a definite need of rigorous studies that clearly refer to the underlying neuroscientific principles.
35153850|a|The current study aimed to provide a comprehensive appraisal of the current evidence on the effectiveness of Pivotal Response Training (PRT) for individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and to explore predictors of treatment response. We conducted a systematic review of the following electronic databases and registers: PsycINFO, Medline, Embase, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, ERIC, Linguistics and Language Behavior Abstracts. Six systematic reviews were identified, two with meta-analytic component. Identified reviews varied widely in terms of their aims, outcomes, and designs which precluded a unified and consistent set of conclusions and recommendations. Ten RCTs were identified. Eight of identified RCTs reported at least one language and communication-related outcome. Statistically significant effects of PRT were identified across a majority of identified RCTs for a range of language and communication skills. However, evidence for positive treatment effects of PRT on outcome measures assessing other domains was less robust and/or specific. Overall, both previous systematic reviews and new meta-analysis of the RCTs suggest that PRT shows promise for improving language and communication. Only four RCTs examined the association between baseline child characteristics and treatment outcomes, however, no consistent pattern emerged. This review has identified several key methodological and design improvements that are needed to enable our field to fully capitalize on the potential of RCT designs and characterize detailed profiles of treatment responders. These findings are essential for informing the development of evidence-based guidelines for clinicians on what works for whom and why.
35153788|a|Voltage-gated sodium channel genes are an important family of human epilepsy genes. De novo missense mutations in SCN8A (encoding Nav1.6) are associated with a spectrum of clinical presentation, including multiple seizure types, movement disorders, intellectual disability, and behavioral abnormalities such as autism. Patients with SCN8A mutations are often treated with multiple antiepileptic drugs, the most common being sodium channel blockers. Cannabidiol (CBD) has been included as a component of treatment regimens for some SCN8A patients; however, to date, there are no clinical trials that have evaluated the therapeutic potential of CBD in patients with SCN8A mutations. In the current manuscript, we demonstrated a dose-dependent increase in seizure resistance following CBD treatment in mice expressing the human SCN8A mutation R1620L (RL/+). We also found that CBD treatment improved social behavior and reduced hyperactivity in the RL/+ mutants. Our findings suggest that CBD may be beneficial in patients with SCN8A-associated disease.
35152414|a|OBJECTIVE: Information on mental disorders over time is critical for documenting changes in population burden, and aiding understanding of potential causal and non-causal factors. The aim of this study was to provide temporal changes in the sex- and age-specific incidence rates (IR) of mental disorders diagnosed in Danish hospitals during five decades and investigate whether such changes may be attributable to changes in administrative reporting practice. METHODS: This population-based cohort study included all people living in Denmark between 1970 and 2016. Mental disorders diagnoses were obtained from the Danish Psychiatric Central Research Register. We estimated the IR of each mental disorder (all persons, and sex- and age-specific IRs) and examined the impact of two administrative changes. RESULTS: Our study included 9 107 157 people, followed for 233.0 million person-years. During follow-up, 9.5% were diagnosed with at least one mental disorder. The IR for any mental disorder was 39.0 per 10,000 person-years. Despite fluctuations, this increased between 1970-84 and 2005-2016, from 28.9 to 63.0 per 10,000 person-years. Increases were most pronounced for younger age groups. Administrative changes did appear to influence incidence rates. CONCLUSION: Mental disorder IRs have increased in Denmark since 1970, with age of diagnosis shifting downwards. Both trends were likely impacted by administrative changes, while the latter is likely to be (partly) attributable to earlier detection and increased reporting of child-onset conditions. Our findings may provide valuable context of the epidemiology of mental disorders across age groups for comparison with other studies and populations.
35151411|a|
35151410|a|BACKGROUND: There are no approved pharmacological therapies to support treatment of the core communication and socialisation difficulties associated with autism spectrum disorder in adults. We aimed to assess the efficacy, safety, and pharmacokinetics of balovaptan, a vasopressin 1a receptor antagonist, versus placebo in autistic adults. METHODS: V1aduct was a phase 3, randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial, conducted at 46 sites across six countries (the USA, the UK, France, Italy, Spain, and Canada). Eligible participants were aged 18 years or older with an intelligence quotient (IQ) of 70 or higher, and met the criteria for moderate-to-severe autism spectrum disorder (DSM-5 and Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule). Participants were randomly allocated (1:1), with an independent interactive voice or web-based response system, to receive balovaptan (10 mg) or placebo daily for 24 weeks. Randomisation was stratified by an individual's baseline Vineland-II two-domain composite (2DC) score (<60 or >=60), sex, region (North America or rest of world), and age (<25 years or >=25 years). Participants, study site personnel, and the sponsor were masked to treatment assignment. The primary endpoint was change from baseline in Vineland-II 2DC score (the mean composite score across the Vineland-II socialisation and communication domains) at week 24. The primary analysis was done with ANCOVA in the intention-to-treat population. The V1aduct study was terminated for futility after around 50% of participants completed the week 24 visit. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03504917). FINDINGS: Between Aug 8, 2018, and July 1, 2020, 540 people were screened for eligibility, of whom 322 were allocated to receive balovaptan (164 [51%]) or placebo (158 [49%]). One participant from the balovaptan group was not treated before trial termination and was excluded from the analysis. 60 participants in the balovaptan group and 55 in the placebo group discontinued treatment before week 24. The sample consisted of 64 (20%) women and 257 (80%) men, with 260 (81%) participants from North America and 61 (19%) from Europe. At baseline, mean age was 27 6 years (SD 9 7) and mean IQ score was 104 8 (18 1). Two (1%) participants were American Indian or Alaska Native, eight (2%) were Asian, 15 (5%) were Black or African American, 283 (88%) were White, four (1%) were of multiple races, and nine (3%) were of unknown race. Mean baseline Vineland-II 2DC scores were 67 2 (SD 15 3) in the balovaptan group and 66 2 (17 7) in the placebo group. The interim futility analysis showed no improvement for balovaptan versus placebo in terms of Vineland-II 2DC score at week 24 compared with baseline, with a least-squares mean change of 2 91 (SE 1 52) in the balovaptan group (n=79) and 4 75 (1 60) in the placebo group (n=71; estimated treatment difference -1 84 [95% CI -5 15 to 1 48]). In the final analysis, mean change from baseline in Vineland-II 2DC score at week 24 was 4 56 (SD 10 85) in the balovaptan group (n=111) and 6 83 (12 18) in the placebo group (n=99). Balovaptan was well tolerated, with similar proportions of participants with at least one adverse event in the balovaptan group (98 [60%] of 163) and placebo group (104 [66%] of 158). The most common adverse events were nasopharyngitis (14 [9%] in the balovaptan group and 19 [12%] in the placebo group), diarrhoea (11 [7%] and 14 [9%]), upper respiratory tract infection (ten [6%] and nine [6%]), insomnia (five [3%] and eight [5%]), oropharyngeal pain (five [3%] and eight [5%]), and dizziness (two [1%] and ten [6%]). Serious adverse events were reported for two (1%) participants in the balovaptan group (one each of suicidal ideation and schizoaffective disorder), and five (3%) participants in the placebo group (one each of suicidal ideation, panic disorder, limb abscess, urosepsis, colitis [in the same participant with urosepsis], and death by suicide). No treatment-related deaths occurred. INTERPRETATION: Balovaptan did not improve social communication in autistic adults. This study provides insights into challenges facing autism spectrum disorder trials, including the considerable placebo response and the selection of appropriate outcome measures. FUNDING: F Hoffmann-La Roche.
35151277|a|BACKGROUND: Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC)-associated neuropsychiatric disorders (TAND) is an umbrella term for the behavioural, psychiatric, intellectual, academic, neuropsychological and psychosocial manifestations of TSC. Although TAND affects 90% of individuals with TSC during their lifetime, these manifestations are relatively under-assessed, under-treated and under-researched. We performed a comprehensive scoping review of all TAND research to date (a) to describe the existing TAND research landscape and (b) to identify knowledge gaps to guide future TAND research. METHODS: The study was conducted in accordance with stages outlined within the Arksey and O'Malley scoping review framework. Ten research questions relating to study characteristics, research design and research content of TAND levels and clusters were examined. RESULTS: Of the 2841 returned searches, 230 articles published between 1987 and 2020 were included (animal studies = 30, case studies = 47, cohort studies = 153), with more than half published since the term TAND was coined in 2012 (118/230; 51%). Cohort studies largely involved children and/or adolescents (63%) as opposed to older adults (16%). Studies were represented across 341 individual research sites from 45 countries, the majority from the USA (89/341; 26%) and the UK (50/341; 15%). Only 48 research sites (14%) were within low-middle income countries (LMICs). Animal studies and case studies were of relatively high/high quality, but cohort studies showed significant variability. Of the 153 cohort studies, only 16 (10%) included interventions. None of these were non-pharmacological, and only 13 employed remote methodologies (e.g. telephone interviews, online surveys). Of all TAND clusters, the autism spectrum disorder-like cluster was the most widely researched (138/230; 60%) and the scholastic cluster the least (53/200; 27%). CONCLUSIONS: Despite the recent increase in TAND research, studies that represent participants across the lifespan, LMIC research sites and non-pharmacological interventions were identified as future priorities. The quality of cohort studies requires improvement, to which the use of standardised direct behavioural assessments may contribute. In human studies, the academic level in particular warrants further investigation. Remote technologies could help to address many of the TAND knowledge gaps identified.
35151261|a|OBJECTIVE: To explore the associations between childhood infections and subsequent diagnoses of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), intellectual disability (ID), and their co-occurrence. METHODS: The association between specialized care for any infection, defined by ICD-codes, and later ASD or ID was investigated in a register-based cohort of 556,732 individuals born 1987-2010, resident in Stockholm County, followed from birth to their 18th birthday or December 31, 2016. We considered as potential confounders children's characteristics, family socioeconomic factors, obstetric complications, and parental histories of treatment for infection and psychiatric disorders in survival analyses with extended Cox regression models. Residual confounding by shared familial factors was addressed in sibling analyses using within-strata estimation in Cox regression models. Sensitivity analyses with the exclusion of congenital causes of ASD/ID and documented risk for infections were also performed. RESULTS: Crude estimates indicated that infections during childhood were associated with later ASD and ID with the largest risks observed for diagnoses involving ID. Inclusion of covariates, exclusion of congenital causes of ASD/ID from the population, and sibling comparisons highlighted the potential for confounding by both heritable and non-heritable factors, though risks remained in all adjusted models. In adjusted sibling comparisons, excluding congenital causes, infections were associated with later "ASD without ID" (HR 1.24, 95%CI 1.15-1.33), "ASD with ID" (1.57, 1.35-1.82), and "ID without ASD" (2.01, 1.76-2.28). Risks associated with infections varied by age at exposure and by age at diagnosis of ASD/ID. CONCLUSIONS: Infections during childhood may contribute to a later diagnosis of ID and ASD.
35151216|a|Resilience is a dynamic process through which people adjust to adversity and buffer anxiety and depression. The COVID-19 global pandemic has introduced a shared source of adversity for people across the world, with detrimental implications for mental health. Despite the pronounced vulnerability of autistic adults to anxiety and depression during the COVID-19 pandemic, relationships among autism-related quantitative traits, resilience, and mental health outcomes have not been examined. As such, we aimed to describe the relationships between these traits in a sample enriched in autism spectrum-related quantitative traits during the COVID-19 pandemic. We also aimed to investigate the impact of demographic and social factors on these relationships. Across three independent samples of adults, we assessed resilience factors, autism-related quantitative traits, anxiety symptoms, and depression symptoms during the COVID-19 pandemic. One sample (recruited via the Autism Spectrum Program of Excellence, n = 201) was enriched for autism traits while the other two (recruited via Amazon Mechanical Turk, n = 624 and Facebook, n = 929) drew from the general population. We found resilience factors and quantitative autism-related traits to be inversely related, regardless of the resilience measure used. Additionally, we found that resilience factors moderate the relationship between autism-related quantitative traits and depression symptoms such that resilience appears to be protective. Across the neurodiversity spectrum, resilience factors may be targets to improve mental health outcomes. This approach may be especially important during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and in its aftermath.
35150783|a|Systemic inflammation has been thought to play a considerable part in psychiatric disorders. However, the causal relationships between systemic inflammation and psychiatric disorders and the directions of the causal effects remain elusive and need further investigation. By leveraging the summary statistics of genome-wide association studies, the standard inverse variance weighted method was applied to assess the causal associations among 41 systemic inflammatory regulators and 7 major psychiatric disorders, including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), anorexia nervosa (AN), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), bipolar disorder (BIP), major depression disorder (MDD), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and schizophrenia (SCZ), within a two-sample bidirectional Mendelian randomization analysis. Additionally, the weighted median test and the Mendelian randomization pleiotropy residual sum and outlier test were conducted for sensitivity analyses. The results suggested a total of 15 unique systemic inflammatory regulators might be causally associated with disease risk, including 2 for ADHD, 4 for AN, 2 for ASD, 2 for MDD, 2 for OCD, and 5 for SCZ. Among them, the genetically predicted concentration of basic fibroblast growth factor was significantly related to AN at the Bonferroni-corrected threshold (Odds ratio = 0.403, 95% confidence interval = (0.261, 0.622), P = 4.03 x 10-5). Furthermore, the concentrations of 9 systemic inflammatory regulators might be influenced by neuropsychiatric disorders, including 2 by ADHD, 2 by BIP, 3 by MDD, and 2 by SCZ, and the causal effects of ASD, AN, and OCD need to be further assessed when more significant genetic variants are identified in the future. Overall, this study provides additional insights into the relationships between systemic inflammation and psychiatric disorders and may provide new clues regarding the aetiology, diagnosis and treatment of psychiatric disorders.
35150089|a|BACKGROUND: Angelman syndrome (AS) is a rare neurogenetic disorder present in approximately 1/12,000 individuals and characterized by developmental delay, cognitive impairment, motor dysfunction, seizures, gastrointestinal concerns, and abnormal electroencephalographic background. AS is caused by absent expression of the paternally imprinted gene UBE3A in the central nervous system. Disparities in the management of AS are a major problem in preparing for precision therapies and occur even in patients with access to experts and recognized clinics. AS patients receive care based on collective provider experience due to limited evidence-based literature. We present a consensus statement and comprehensive literature review that proposes a standard of care practices for the management of AS at a critical time when therapeutics to alter the natural history of the disease are on the horizon. METHODS: We compiled the key recognized clinical features of AS based on consensus from a team of specialists managing patients with AS. Working groups were established to address each focus area with committees comprised of providers who manage >5 individuals. Committees developed management guidelines for their area of expertise. These were compiled into a final document to provide a framework for standardizing management. Evidence from the medical literature was also comprehensively reviewed. RESULTS: Areas covered by working groups in the consensus document include genetics, developmental medicine, psychology, general health concerns, neurology (including movement disorders), sleep, psychiatry, orthopedics, ophthalmology, communication, early intervention and therapies, and caregiver health. Working groups created frameworks, including flowcharts and tables, to help with quick access for providers. Data from the literature were incorporated to ensure providers had review of experiential versus evidence-based care guidelines. CONCLUSION: Standards of care in the management of AS are keys to ensure optimal care at a critical time when new disease-modifying therapies are emerging. This document is a framework for providers of all familiarity levels.
35150078|a|Face memory research in autism has largely neglected memory for facial expressions, in favor of memory for identity. This study in three experiments examined the role of gaze direction and type of expression on memory for facial expressions in relation to the autism spectrum. In the learning phase, four combinations of facial expressions (joy/anger) and gaze direction (toward/away), displayed by 16 different identities, were presented. In a subsequent surprise test the same identities were presented displaying neutral expressions, and the expression of each identity had to be recalled. In Experiment 1, typically-developed (TD) individuals with low and high Autism Quotient (AQ) scores were tested with three repetitions of each emotion/gaze combination, which did not produce any modulations. In Experiment 2, another group of TD individuals with low and high AQ scores were tested with eight repetitions, resulting in a "happy advantage" and a "direct gaze advantage", but no interactions. In Experiment 3, individuals with high-functioning autism (HFA) and a matched TD group were tested using eight repetitions. The HFA group revealed no emotion or gaze effects, while the matched TD group showed both a happy and a direct gaze advantage, and again no interaction. The results suggest that in autistic individuals the memory for facial expressions is intact, but is not modulated by the person's expression type and gaze direction. We discuss whether anomalous implicit learning of facial cues could have contributed to these findings, its relevance for social intuition, and its possible contribution to social deficits in autism. LAY SUMMARY: It has often been found that memory for someone's face (facial identity) is less good in autism. However, it is not yet known whether memory for someone's facial expression is also less good in autism. In this study, the memory for expressions of joy and anger was investigated in typically-developed (TD) individuals who possessed either few or many autistic-like traits (Experiments 1 and 2), and in individuals with high-functioning autism (Experiment 3). The gaze direction was also varied (directed either toward, or away from, the observer). We found that TD individuals best remembered expressions of joy, and remembered expressions of both joy and anger better when the gaze was directed at them. These effects did not depend on the extent to which they possessed autistic-like traits. Autistic participants remembered the facial expression of a previously encountered person as good as TD participants did. However, in contrast to the TD participants, the memory of autistic participants was not influenced by the expression type and gaze direction of the previously encountered persons. We discuss whether this may lead to difficulties in the development of social intuition, which in turn could give rise to difficulties in social interaction that are characteristic for autism.
35149865|a|Adolescence constitutes a period of vulnerability in the emergence of fear-related disorders (FRD), as a massive reorganization occurs in the amygdala-prefrontal cortex network, critical to regulate fear behavior. Genetic and environmental factors during development may predispose to the emergence of FRD at the adult age, but the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. In the present study, we tested whether a partial knock-down of tuberous sclerosis complex 2 (Tsc2, Tuberin), a risk gene for neurodevelopmental disorders, in the basolateral amygdala (BLA) from adolescence could alter fear-network functionality and create a vulnerability ground to FRD appearance at adulthood. Using bilateral injection of a lentiviral vector expressing a miRNA against Tsc2 in the BLA of early (PN25) or late adolescent (PN50) rats, we show that alteration induced specifically from PN25 resulted in an increased c-Fos activity at adulthood in specific layers of the prelimbic cortex, a resistance to fear extinction and an overgeneralization of fear to a safe, novel stimulus. A developmental dysfunction of the amygdala could thus play a role in the vulnerability to FRD emergence at adulthood. We propose our methodology as an alternative to model the developmental vulnerability to FRD, especially in its comorbidity with TSC2-related autism syndrome.
35149435|a|Few studies have used task-based functional connectivity (FC) magnetic resonance imaging to examine emotion-processing during the critical neurodevelopmental period of adolescence in Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs). Moreover, task designs with pervasive confounds (e.g., lack of appropriate controls) persist because they activate neural circuits of interest reliably. As an alternative approach to "subtracting" activity from putative control conditions, we propose examining FC across an entire task run. By pivoting our analysis and interpretation of existing paradigms, we may better understand neural response to non-focal instances of socially-relevant stimuli that approximate real-world experiences more closely. Hence, using two well-established affective tasks (face-viewing, face-matching) with diverging social-cognitive demands, we investigated extrinsic FC from amygdala (AMG) and fusiform gyrus (FG) seeds in typically-developing (TD; N = 17) and ASD (N = 17) male adolescents (10-18 yo) and clinical correlations (Social Communication Questionnaire; SCQ) of group FC differences. Participant data (4TD, 6ASD) with excessive head-motion were excluded from final analysis. Direct between-group comparisons revealed significant differences between groups for neural response but not task performance (accuracy, reaction time). During face-viewing, we found greater FC from AMG and FG seeds for ASD participants (ASD > TD) in regions involved in the Default Mode and Fronto-Parietal Task Control Networks. During face-matching, we found greater FC from AMG and FG seeds for TD participants (TD > ASD), in regions associated with the Salience, Dorsal Attention, and Somatosensory Networks. SCQ scores correlated positively with regions with group differences on the face-viewing task and negatively with regions identified for the face-matching task. Task-dependent group differences in FC despite comparable behavioral performance suggest that high-functioning ASD may wield compensatory strategies; clinically-correlated FC patterns may associate with differential task-demands, ecological validity, and context-dependent processing. Employing this novel approach may further the development of targeted therapeutic interventions informed by individual differences in the highly heterogeneous ASD population.
35149383|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are a group of neurodevelopmental disorders that develop in early life due to interaction between several genetic and environmental factors and lead to alterations in brain function and structure. During the last decades, several mechanisms have been placed to explain the pathogenesis of autism. Unfortunately, these are reported in several studies and reviews which make it difficult to follow by the reader. In addition, some recent molecular mechanisms related to ASD have been unrevealed. This paper revises and highlights the major common molecular mechanisms responsible for the clinical symptoms seen in people with ASD, including the roles of common genetic factors and disorders, neuroinflammation, GABAergic signaling, and alterations in Ca+2 signaling. Besides, it covers the major molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways involved in initiating the epileptic seizure, including the alterations in the GABAergic and glutamate signaling, vitamin and mineral deficiency, disorders of metabolism, and autoimmunity. Finally, this review also discusses sleep disorder patterns and the molecular mechanisms underlying them.
35149330|a|BACKGROUND: Previous studies examining the association between child behavior problems and parental stress have reported mixed results. AIM: This study aimed to explore the associations between child behavior problems and parental stress as well as parental stress and dyadic adjustment, and the moderating roles of stress communication, perceived partner supportive dyadic coping, and perceived social support in the relationship between parental stress and dyadic adjustment. METHODS AND PROCEDURES: Data were derived from 233 parents with at least one child with ASD from Iran. OUTCOMES AND RESULTS: The results demonstrated that child behavior problems were positively associated with parental stress whereas parental stress was negatively associated with dyadic adjustment. Furthermore, stress communication, perceived partner supportive dyadic coping, and perceived social support moderated the relationship between parental stress and dyadic adjustment. CONCLUSIONS: The current findings may attract the attention of clinicians and professionals who work with parents of children with ASD on the effect of stress and how to manage stress on these parents' dyadic adjustment.
35147909|a|Abnormal synchronous neuronal activity has been widely detected by brain imaging of autistic patients, but its underlying neural mechanism remains unclear. Compared with wild-type mice, our in vivo two-photon imaging showed that transgenic (Tg1) mice over-expressing human autism risk gene MeCP2 exhibited higher neuronal synchrony in the young but lower synchrony in the adult stage. Whole-cell recording of neuronal pairs in brain slices revealed that higher neuronal synchrony in young postnatal Tg1 mice was attributed mainly to more prevalent giant slow inward currents (SICs). Both in vivo and slice imaging further demonstrated more dynamic activity and higher synchrony in astrocytes from young Tg1 mice. Blocking astrocytic gap junctions markedly decreased the generation of SICs and overall cell synchrony in the Tg1 brain. Furthermore, the expression level of Cx43 protein and the coupling efficiency of astrocyte gap junctions remained unchanged in Tg1 mice. Thus, astrocytic gap junctions facilitate but do not act as a direct trigger for the abnormal neuronal synchrony in young Tg1 mice, revealing the potential role of the astrocyte network in the pathogenesis of MeCP2 duplication syndrome.
35146903|a|NEXMIF pathogenic variants have been known to produce a wide spectrum of X-linked intellectual disability (ID) in both males and females. Thus far, few individuals from diverse populations have been described with NEXMIF-related disorders. Herein, we report three individuals with NEXMIF pathogenic variants, the first two are the only males of Korean and Vietnamese descent described with this disorder to our knowledge. The last patient is a Hispanic female who harbors the same pathogenic variant as a previously described Caucasian individual, but with differing clinical presentation. These patients present with many classic symptoms of NEXMIF-related disorders including ID, epilepsy, developmental delay, and dysmorphic features. In addition, they have symptoms that have not been thoroughly described in the literature, including allergies with multiple anaphylactic events and hypothyroidism. This report is intended to raise awareness and educate about the clinical signs that may prompt testing for NEXMIF-related disorders.
35145438|a|Dopamine receptor partial agonists (DRPAs; aripiprazole, brexpiprazole, and cariprazine) constitute a novel class of antipsychotics. Although they share a similar mechanism of action, DRPAs differ in their pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, drug interactions, or safety and tolerability. The antipsychotic efficacy of all three drugs was established in several placebo-controlled randomized trials (RCTs) in schizophrenia, both acute phase and relapse prevention. In addition, each of the DRPA agents has been tested in other psychiatric disorders, including bipolar disorder or major depression. However, a few studies have examined their comparative clinical efficacy. There are no head-to-head comparisons between aripiprazole, brexpiprazole, or cariprazine. In two acute schizophrenia RCTs of cariprazine and brexpiprazole, aripiprazole was used as an indirect comparator to control for study sensitivity. To assess potential differences in the efficacy of DRPAs, we reviewed data from controlled trials, systematic reviews, and meta-analyses. Our results showed that the acute antipsychotic effects of DRPAs, as measured by the number needed to treat, are comparable. The three agents were superior to placebo in acute treatment, and cariprazine was found to be effective in the reduction of primary negative symptoms of schizophrenia. In the therapy of bipolar disorder, aripiprazole and cariprazine showed antimanic efficacy, cariprazine was also effective in the management of bipolar depression, and aripiprazole was effective for relapse prevention. The addon administration of aripiprazole or brexpiprazole reduced symptoms of major depression. Aripiprazole can control acute agitation associated with psychosis or bipolar disorder; brexpiprazole showed the potential to manage agitation in dementia patients. Aripiprazole has also established evidence of efficacy in children and adolescents and other conditions: OCD, tic disorders, and autism spectrum disorder. Our review of published data suggests that in terms of clinical efficacy, DRPAs are a heterogeneous group, with each drug possessing its own therapeutic benefits.
35145211|a|
35144859|a|Protein translation is a highly regulated process involving the interaction of numerous genes on every component of the protein translation machinery. Upregulated protein translation is a hallmark of cancer and is implicated in autism spectrum disorder, but the risks of developing each disease do not appear to be correlated with one another. In this study we identified two siblings from the NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program with loss of function variants in PUS7, a gene previously implicated in the regulation of total protein translation. These patients exhibited a neurodevelopmental phenotype including autism spectrum disorder in the proband. Both patients also had features of Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, including hyperuricemia and self-injurious behavior, but without pathogenic variants in HPRT1. Patient fibroblasts demonstrated upregulation of protein synthesis, including elevated MYC protein, but did not exhibit increased rates of cell proliferation. Interestingly, the dysregulation of protein translation also resulted in mildly decreased levels of HPRT1 protein suggesting an association between dysregulated protein translation and the LNS-like phenotypic findings. These findings strengthen the correlation between neurodevelopmental disease, particularly autism spectrum disorders, and the rate of protein translation.
35144804|a|BACKGROUND: Neuroimaging studies have reported functional connectome aberrancies in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, the time-varying patterns of connectome topology in individuals with ASD and the connection between these patterns and gene expression profiles remain unknown. METHODS: To investigate case-control differences in dynamic connectome topology, we conducted mega- and meta-analyses of resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data of 939 participants (440 patients with ASD and 499 healthy control subjects, all males) from 18 independent sites, selected from the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE) dataset. Functional data were preprocessed and analyzed using harmonized protocols, and brain module dynamics was assessed using a multilayer network model. We further leveraged postmortem brain-wide gene expression data to identify transcriptomic signatures associated with ASD-related alterations in brain dynamics. RESULTS: Compared with healthy control participants, individuals with ASD exhibited a higher global mean and lower standard deviation of whole-brain module dynamics, indicating an unstable and less regionally differentiated pattern. More specifically, individuals with ASD showed higher module switching, primarily in the medial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate gyrus, and angular gyrus, and lower switching in the visual regions. These alterations in brain dynamics were predictive of social impairments in individuals with ASD and were linked with expression profiles of genes primarily involved in the regulation of neurotransmitter transport and secretion as well as with previously identified autism-related genes. CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to identify consistent alterations in brain network dynamics in ASD and the transcriptomic signatures related to those alterations, furthering insights into the biological basis behind this disorder.
35144699|a|Marine n-3 fatty acids (n-3LCPUFA) have shown neurocognitive benefits in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), but few trials have examined effects in adults with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We explored, if n-3LCPUFA affect cognitive functions in adults with ASD, and if effects are modified by comorbid ADHD. In a 2x4 week crossover study, 26 participants were randomized to sequence of supplementation with fish oil (FO, 5.2 g/d n-3PUFA) and safflower oil (SO). At baseline and after each period, we measured primary outcomes: attention (d2-test) and spatial working memory (Corsi test) and secondary outcomes: flexibility (Stroop word-colour test), ADHD symptoms (Conners scales), executive functions (Behavioural Inventory of Executive Function) and social behaviour (Social Responsiveness Scale). The dropout rate was 15%. Compliance was 94% and correlated with whole-blood n-3LCPUFA. Corsi scores improved by ~0.3xSD (P=0.032) after FO vs SO, and the odds for d2 errors were 30% lower (P=0.016), which was supported by improved Conners scores of attention (P=0.023). Improvement in Conners ADHD symptom score was limited to participants with ADHD (-3.5(-6.0;-1.0), n=10 vs -0.2(-2.5;2.2), n=11 without ADHD, Pinteraction=0.096), who also improved their behavioural regulation index by 0.3xSD after FO (Pinteraction=0.016). Participants without ADHD gained most in d2 test performance (OR=0.4(0.2;0.7) vs 0.9(0.6;1.3) in those with ADHD, Pinteraction=0.002), but their executive function score was exacerbated after FO (5.9(0.0,11.8), Pinteraction=0.039). Our results did not show any effects on ASD symptoms, but suggest that FO may improve attention and working memory in adults with ASD and ameliorate ADHD symptoms in those with comorbid ADHD.
35141426|a|Background: Preschool aged children with developmental disabilities frequently receive a diagnosis of an indicator of disability, such as developmental delay, some time before receiving a definitive diagnosis at school age, such as autism spectrum disorder. The absence of a definitive diagnosis potentially underestimates the need for support by families with young disabled children, also delaying the access of families to condition-specific information and support. Our aim was to develop a strategy to identify children with probable and potential developmental disabilities before the age of five in primary care records for a UK birth cohort, considering how the identification of only probable or potential developmental disability might influence prevalence estimates. Methods: As part of a study of the effects of caring for young children with developmental disabilities on mothers' health and healthcare use, we developed a two-part strategy to identify: 1) children with conditions associated with significant disability and which can be diagnosed during the preschool period; and 2) children with diagnoses which could indicate potential disability, such as motor development disorder. The strategy, using Read codes, searched the electronic records of children in the Born in Bradford cohort with linked maternal and child sociodemographic information. The results were compared with national and Bradford prevalence estimates. Results: We identified 83 children with disability conditions and 394 with potential disability (44 children had a disability condition and an indicator of potential disability). Combined they produced a developmental disability prevalence of 490 per 10,000 which is above the UK estimate for developmental disabilities in children under five (468 per 10,000) and within the 419-505 per 10,000 prevalence estimated for Bradford (for children aged 0-18). Conclusions: When disability prevalence is estimated only using conditions diagnosed as developmental disabilities, most young children with developmental disabilities likely to be diagnosed at later ages will be missed.
35144198|a|The need for computational models that can incorporate imaging data with non-imaging data while investigating inter-subject associations arises in the task of population-based disease analysis. Although off-the-shelf deep convolutional neural networks have empowered representation learning from imaging data, incorporating data of different modalities complementarily in a unified model to improve the disease diagnostic quality is still challenging. In this work, we propose a generalizable graph-convolutional framework for population-based disease prediction on multi-modal medical data. Unlike previous methods constructing a static affinity population graph in a hand-crafting manner, the proposed framework can automatically learn to build a population graph with variational edges, which we show can be optimized jointly with spectral graph convolutional networks. In addition, to estimate the predictive uncertainty related to the constructed graph, we propose Monte-Carlo edge dropout uncertainty estimation. Experimental results on four multi-modal datasets demonstrate that the proposed method can substantially improve the predictive accuracy for Autism Spectrum Disorder, Alzheimer's disease, and ocular diseases. A sufficient ablation study with in-depth discussion is conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of each component and the choice of algorithmic details of the proposed method. The results indicate the potential and extendability of the proposed framework in leveraging multi-modal data for population-based disease prediction.
35144168|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a pervasive neurodevelopmental disorder that affects about 1 out of every 54 youth and is characterized by impairments in social communication and functioning. ASD is a treatable condition though, and early initiation of interventions in the home and community can lead to improved long-term outcomes. Despite the clear benefits of early diagnosis and intervention, many youth, particularly from impoverished and minoritized populations, face tremendous barriers to accessing a timely formal diagnosis and critical early supports. Many of these barriers are inherent features of a fragmented health care system that even the most resourced of families struggle to navigate. Informed by the principles of coproduction of health care, value-based care design, and health equity, we present a quality improvement initiative to defragment the experience of care for underserved families seeking a timely formal diagnosis of ASD in a safety-net community-based health system. Over the course of 2.5 years, we were able to partner with families to create clinical workflows that cut in half the duration of time from first developmental concern to ASD diagnosis, and lowered the median age of ASD diagnosis in our health system by more than 3 years. We share our process and lessons learned in the hopes of helping other health systems pursuing similar goals for patient- and family-centered care design.
35143543|a|Humans beings decide to trust others selectively, often based on the appearance of a face. But how do observers deal with the wide variety of facial morphologies and, in particular, those outside their own familiar cultural group? Using reverse correlation, a data-driven approach to explore how individuals create internal representations without external biases, we studied the generation of trustworthy faces by French and Chinese participants (N = 160) within and outside their own cultural group. Participants selected the most trustworthy or attractive (control condition) face from two identical European or Asian descent faces that had been modified by different noise masks. A conjunction analysis to reveal facial features common to both cultures showed that Chinese and French participants unconsciously increased the contrast of the "pupil-iris area" to make the face appear more trustworthy. No significant effects common to both groups were found for the attraction condition suggesting that attraction judgements are dependent on cultural processes. These results suggest the presence of universal cross-cultural mechanisms for the construction of implicit first impressions of trust, and highlight the importance of the eyes area in this process.
35143494|a|BACKGROUND: Considering the COVID-19 pandemic, understanding the reliability, validity, social validity, and feasibility of using telehealth to diagnose ASD is a critical public health issue. This paper examines evidence supporting the use of telehealth methods to diagnose ASD and outlines the necessary modifications and adaptations to support telehealth diagnosis. METHODS AND PROCEDURES: Studies were identified by searching PubMed and PsychInfo electronic databases and references lists of relevant articles. Only peer reviewed articles published in English with a focus on using telehealth for the purposes of diagnosing ASD were included. Searches were conducted through June 3rd, 2021. OUTCOMES AND RESULTS: A total of 10 studies were identified as meeting inclusion criteria. Of the eight papers that reported on reliability (e.g., accuracy), telehealth methods to diagnose ASD were between 80-91% accurate when compared with traditional in-person diagnosis. Six studies reported on validity (i.e., sensitivity and/or specificity). All six studies calculated sensitivity, with values ranging from 75% and 100%. Five of the six studies calculated specificity, with values ranging from 68.75% and 100%. The seven papers that reported social validity indicated that caregivers, as well as adult participants and clinicians, were mostly satisfied with telehealth. Feasibility was reported by seven studies and suggests that telehealth methods appear largely viable, though some challenges were reported. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Although findings reviewed here are promising, more research is needed to verify the accuracy, validity, and feasibility of utilizing telehealth to diagnose ASD. Studies with larger sample sizes and samples across sites will be critical, as these will allow clinicians to identify subjects most likely to benefit from telehealth as well as those more likely to require an in-person assessment. This research is important not only due to the current pandemic, but also due to increased prevalence rates of ASD and an insufficient number of diagnostic providers-particularly in rural and/or otherwise under-served communities.
35142078|a|Recent theories propose that domain-general deficits in prediction (i.e., the ability to anticipate upcoming information) underlie the behavioral characteristics associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). If these theories are correct, autistic children might be expected to demonstrate difficulties on linguistic tasks that rely on predictive processing. Previous research has largely focused on older autistic children and adolescents with average language and cognition. The present study used an eye-gaze task to evaluate predictive language processing among 3- to 4-year-old autistic children (n = 34) and 1.5- to 3-year-old, language-matched neurotypical (NT) children (n = 34). Children viewed images (e.g., a cake and a ball) and heard sentences with informative verbs (e.g., Eat the cake) or neutral verbs (e.g., Find the cake). Analyses of children's looking behaviors indicated that young autistic children, like their language-matched NT peers, engaged in predictive language processing. Regression results revealed a significant effect of diagnostic group, when statistically controlling for age differences. The NT group displayed larger difference scores between the informative and neutral verb conditions (in looks to target nouns) compared to the ASD group. Receptive language measures were predictive of looking behavior across time for both groups, such that children with stronger language skills were more efficient in making use of informative verbs to process upcoming information. Taken together, these results suggest that young autistic children can engage in predictive processing though further research is warranted to explore the developmental trajectory relative to NT development.
35141963|a|Slaton and Hanley (2016) compared the effects of multiple and chained schedules on stereotypy and item engagement for 2 individuals who exhibited automatically maintained motor stereotypy. Contingent access to motor stereotypy (i.e., chained schedules) was more effective than time-based access (i.e., multiple schedules) at reducing motor stereotypy, increasing item engagement, and establishing stimulus control for both participants. We systematically replicated Slaton and Hanley with 2 participants by a) targeting vocal stereotypy, b) including response interruption and redirection as a treatment component across conditions, c) conducting sessions in the natural environment with teaching assistants as change agents, and d) conducting an analysis of the effective treatment component(s). Chained schedules were more effective for 1 participant, whereas both treatments were effective for the other participant. The component analysis showed that different components were necessary for effective treatment for each participant.
35141915|a|Raising a child with a neurodevelopmental disorder has often been associated with poorer quality of life and family functioning. Yet, many family members describe themselves as resilient and capable of achieving well-being. Whether and how this occurs in racial/ethnic minority families remains largely unexplored. The aim of this study was to systematically synthesize qualitative studies exploring how families from a racial/ethnic minority background in the United States (1) experienced well-being and (2) responded to challenges they faced while caring for a child diagnosed with three selected neurodevelopmental disorders: autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and intellectual disability. A systematic literature search was conducted in November and December of 2019 and updated in October 2021. Three themes were developed based on included studies: "moving toward well-being as a caregiver," "family and culture: impact on well-being," and "community and culture: impact on well-being." The findings in this review indicate that to develop well-being, racial/ethnic minority families faced additional barriers, including racial/ethnic discrimination and stigma within their family and cultural community. The knowledge generated has the potential to identify areas of intervention to promote resilience and well-being in racial/ethnic minority families raising a child with a neurodevelopmental disorder.
35141816|a|Brain connectivity of individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) is heterogenous, as are the behavioral manifestations. The current study investigated brain-behavior relationships in the context of social skills and executive function profiles with data from the Autism Brain Imaging Database Exchange II. We calculated connectivity measures from diffusion tensor imaging using Bayesian estimation and probabilistic tractography. Subsequently, we performed structural equation modeling by regressing three latent factors, yielded from an exploratory factor analysis, onto total default mode network (DMN) connectivity. Both social regulation processing and self-directed cognitive processing factors moderately, negatively correlated with total DMN connectivity. Our findings indicate social regulation processing difficulties in youth with ASD may be attributable to impaired connectivity between the anterior and posterior DMN.
35141815|a|Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) experience behavioral and emotional symptoms hypothesized to arise from emotion dysregulation (ED), difficulty modulating emotional experience, expression, and intensity in an acceptable and contextually appropriate manner. We developed Regulating Together (RT)-an intensive-outpatient, caregiver-assisted group program to meet the ASD + ED intervention critical need. A within-subjects trial was conducted (5-week-control lead-in period, 5-week-treatment, and 5-and 10-weeks-post-treatment follow-ups). Forty-four youth with ASD + ED (25 8-12, 19 13-18 yr-olds, 88% male, mean FSIQ of 96) participated. Improvements were found in reactivity, emotion regulation knowledge, and flexibility post-treatment and 10-weeks post-treatment. A reduction in inpatient hospitalization rates by 16% from the 12 months pre-RT to 12 months post-RT was observed. RT shows promise to reduce ED in ASD.
35141808|a|
35141114|a|
35141107|a|The efficacy and efficiency of instruction may be reduced as a result of persistent response patterns to targets. The current project exposed participants to tact training with one set of targets. Thereafter, the efficacy and efficiency of teaching different responses to the previously trained set of targets was compared to tact training with a novel set of targets. Results showed that targets with pre-established responses took longer to acquire than targets without pre-existing responses for both participants.
35141106|a|Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) often display impairments in communication, such as limited echoic behavior, few vocal-verbal responses, and a lack of functional communication. One potential way to foster the acquisition of vocal responses in individuals with disabilities is by conditioning vocalizations as reinforcers. Conditioning procedures include stimulus-stimulus pairing, response-contingent pairing (RCP), operant discrimination training, and observational conditioning (OC). However, previous research has not evaluated whether OC can be used to condition vocalizations as reinforcers. The current study assessed whether two conditioning procedures, RCP and OC, were effective in conditioning vocalizations as a reinforcer and also evaluated their effect on the rate of vocalizations. Participants included three children with ASD, ages 5-10 years old. During the conditioning phase, rates of vocalizations during the RCP and OC conditions and a control condition were compared within an adapted alternating-treatments design. Reinforcer assessments were completed in a multielement design, pre- and postconditioning, to assess whether the target vocalizations acquired reinforcing properties. A conditioning effect and an increase in the rate of vocalizations were observed for two of the three participants; however, the conditioning effect was minor for one participant. Overall, the results of this study indicate both the RCP and OC procedures may be beneficial in increasing vocalizations for some children and could be incorporated into clinical programs and further explored in future research.
35141085|a|Job syndrome or hyper-immunoglobulin E syndrome is one of the rare immunologic diseases with only about 300 cases described in the literature until now. Given their low prevalence, our understanding of both autosomal dominant and recessive Job syndromes is still evolving. No specific treatment options are available but early diagnosis may help in treating cases prophylactically with antibiotics and wound care to reduce the patient's burden. We recently encountered a patient diagnosed with Job syndrome with autism who presented with an abscess in the right axillary region. We report this case for its rarity and unique association with developmental neurologic disorder. It is crucial to review this rare syndrome to circumvent any diagnostic delay. Following the disease course and taking all the associations into account is also vital for the clinician's understanding as well as implementing the treatment plan.
35140641|a|Sleep disorder emerges as a common comorbidity in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and the interaction between the core symptoms of ASD and its sleep disorder remains unclear. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) was used on the bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) to investigate the efficacy of rTMS on the core symptoms of ASD and comorbid sleep problems as well as the mediation role of the ASD symptoms between rTMS intervention and sleep improvement. A total of 41 Chinese children with ASD and who met the criteria in the fifth edition of the American Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders were recruited, and 39 of them (mean age: 9.0 +- 4.4 years old; the male-female ratio was 3.9: 1) completed the study with the stimulating protocol of high frequency on the left DLPFC and low frequency on the right DLPFC. They were all assessed three times (before, at 4 weeks after, and at 8 weeks after the stimulation) by the Children's Sleep Habits Questionnaire (CSHQ), Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ), Childhood Autism Rating Scale, Repetitive Behavior Questionnaire-2, and Short Sensory Profile (SSP). The repeated-measures ANOVA showed that the main effect of "intervention time" of CSHQ (F = 25.103, P < 0.001), SSP (F = 6.345, P = 0.003), and SDQ (F = 9.975, P < 0.001) was statistically significant. By Bayesian mediation analysis, we only found that the total score of SSP mediated the treating efficacy of rTMS on CSHQ (alphabeta = 5.11 +- 1.51, 95% CI: 2.50-8.41). The percentage of mediation effect in total effect was 37.94%. Our results indicated the treating efficacy of rTMS modulation on bilateral DLPFC for both autistic symptoms and sleep disturbances. The sensory abnormality of ASD mediated the improvement of rTMS on sleep problems of ASD.
35140635|a|The rapid expansion of online job interviews during the COVID-19 pandemic is expected to continue after the pandemic has subsided. These interviews are a significant barrier for individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). There is little evidence-based training for online job interviews for individuals with ASD, and the development of new trainings is expected. In an effort to facilitate online job interview skill acquisition for individuals with ASD, we developed a group-based online job interview training program using a virtual robot (GOT). In GOT, the interviewer and interviewee are projected as virtual robots on the screen. Five participants were grouped and performed the role of interviewee, interviewer, and evaluator. The participants performed all roles in a random order. Each session consisted of a first job interview session, feedback session, and second job interview session. The participants experienced 25 sessions. Before and after GOT, the participants underwent a mock online job interview with a human professional interviewer (MOH) to evaluate the effect of GOT. In total, 15 individuals with ASD took part in the study. The GOT improved self-confidence, motivation, the understanding of others' perspectives, verbal competence, non-verbal competence, and interview performance scores. There was also a significant increase in the recognition of the importance of the point of view of interviewers and evaluators after the second MOH compared to after the first MOH. Using a VR robot and learning the importance of interview skills by experiencing other perspectives (i.e., viewpoint of interviewer and evaluator) may have sustained their motivation and enabled greater self-confidence. Given the promising results of this study and to draw definitive conclusions regarding the efficacy of virtual reality (VR) robots for mock online job interview training, further studies with larger, more diverse samples of individuals with ASD using a longitudinal design are warranted.
35140360|a|Nephronophthisis is an autosomal-recessive kidney disease that is caused by abnormalities in primary cilia. Nephronophthisis-related ciliopathies (NPHP-RCs) are a common cause of end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) in children and adolescents. NPHP-RCs are often accompanied by extrarenal manifestations, including intellectual disability, retinitis pigmentosa, or polydactyly. Although more than 100 causative genes have been identified, its diagnosis is difficult because the clinical features of each mutation often overlap. From September 2010 to August 2021, we performed genetic analysis, including next-generation sequencing (NGS), in 574 probands with kidney dysfunction and retrospectively studied cases genetically diagnosed with NPHP-RCs. RESULTS: We detected mutations related to NPHP-RCs in 93 patients from 83 families. Members of 60 families were diagnosed using NGS, and the mutations and the corresponding number of families are as follows: NPHP1 (24), NPHP3 (10), OFD1 (7), WDR35 (5), SDCCAG8 (4), BBS10 (3), TMEM67 (3), WDR19 (3), BBS1 (2), BBS2 (2), IFT122 (2), IFT140 (2), IQCB1 (2), MKKS (2), SCLT1 (2), TTC21B (2), ALMS1 (1), ANKS6 (1), BBS4 (1), BBS12 (1), CC2D2A (1), DYNC2H1 (1), IFT172 (1), and MAPKBP1 (1). A total of 39 cases (41.9%) progressed to ESKD at the time of genetic analysis, whereas 58 cases (62.3%) showed extrarenal manifestations, the most common being developmental delay, intellectual disability, and autism spectrum disorder in 44 patients. Comprehensive genetic analysis using NGS is useful for diagnosing patients with NPHP-RCs.
35139813|a|BACKGROUNDS: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are neurodevelopmental disorders that exhibit within-disorder heterogeneity and cross-disorder phenotypic overlap, thus suggesting that the current disease categories may not fully represent the etiologic essence of the disorders, especially for highly comorbid neurodevelopmental disorders. In this study, we explored the subtypes of a combined sample of ASD and ADHD by integrating measurements of behavior, cognition and brain imaging. METHODS: A total of 164 participants, including 65 with ASD, 47 with ADHD, and 52 controls, were recruited. Unsupervised machine learning with an agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm was used to identify transdiagnostic symptom clusters. Neurocognition and brain structural connectivity measurements were used to assess symptom clusters. Mediation analysis was used to explore the relationship between transdiagnostic symptoms, neurocognition and brain structural connectivity. RESULTS: We identified three symptom clusters that did not fall within the diagnostic boundaries of DSM. External measurements from neurocognition and neuroimaging domains supported distinct profiles, including fine motor function, verbal fluency, and structural connectivity in the corpus callosum between these symptom clusters, highlighting possible biomarkers for ASD and ADHD. Additionally, fine motor function was shown to mediate the relationship between the corpus callosum and perseveration symptoms. CONCLUSIONS: In this transdiagnostic study on ASD and ADHD, we identified three subtypes showing meaningful associations between symptoms, neurocognition and brain white matter structural connectivity. The fine motor function and structural connectivity of corpus callosum might be used as biomarkers for neurodevelopmental disorders with social skill symptoms. The results of this study highlighted the importance of precise phenotyping and further supported the effects of fine motor intervention on ASD and ADHD.
35139800|a|mGlu5 metabotropic glutamate receptors are considered as candidate drug targets in the treatment of "monogenic" forms of autism spectrum disorders (ASD), such as Fragile-X syndrome (FXS). However, despite promising preclinical data, clinical trials using mGlu5 receptor antagonists to treat FXS showed no beneficial effects. Here, we studied the expression and function of mGlu5 receptors in the striatum of adult BTBR mice, which model idiopathic forms of ASD. Both mRNA (splice variant a) and protein levels of mGlu5 receptors were considerably higher in the striatum of BTBR mice. This was associated with a greater mGlu5 receptor-mediated polyphosphoinositides (PI) hydrolysis, that was sensitive to in vivo treatment with the mGlu5 receptor negative allosteric modulator, MTEP. Striatal up-regulation of mGlu5 receptors was associated with changes in the expression of genes encoding for proteins involved in excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission and synaptic plasticity, including Fmr1, Dlg4 (PSD-95), Shank3 (all increased), Brd4, bdnf-exon IX, Mef2c, and Arc (all increased), GriA2, Glun1, Nr2A (all increased) and Grm1 (mGlu1), Grm2 (mGlu2), GriA1 (GluA1), and Gad1 (GAD-67) (all decreased). Behaviorally, BTBR mice showed high repetitive stereotypical behaviors, including self-grooming and deficits in social interactions. Acute or repeated (5 days) injections with MTEP (10 mg/kg, i.p.) reversed the stereotyped behavior and the social interaction deficit. Similar effects were observed with the NMDA receptor blockers MK-801 or ketamine. These findings support a pivotal role of mGlu5 receptor splice variant a abnormal expression and function in adult forms of idiopathic forms of ASD and unveil novel potential targets for therapy.
35139523|a|The 16p11.2 duplication is a well-known cause of developmental delay and autism, but there are only 2 previously reported cases of 16p11.2 triplication. Both of the previously reported cases exhibited tandem triplication on a 16p11.2 duplication inherited from 1 parent. We report fraternal twins presenting with developmental delay and 16p11.2 triplication resulting from inheritance of a 16p11.2 duplicated homolog from each parent. This report also reviews the overlapping features in previously published cases of 16p11.2 triplication, and possible implications are discussed.
35139437|a|Eating disorders (ED) are highly impairing and dangerous conditions that typically onset in adolescence. However, very few prospective studies have examined early childhood risk factors for ED pathology. Given well-established links between temperament and psychopathology, examination of these factors could inform prevention efforts. The current multi-method, multi-informant prospective longitudinal study tested whether laboratory-observed and parent-reported temperament and psychiatric disorders at ages 3 and 6 (N = 609) predict body dissatisfaction at ages 12 and 15 and dimensional symptoms of EDs (anorexia nervosa [AN] and bulimia nervosa [BN]) at age 15 (n = 458) in a community sample. Results indicated that early childhood temperament (positive and negative emotionality, perceptual sensitivity, impulsivity, less shyness) and childhood psychopathology (anxiety, oppositional defiant, attention deficit/hyperactivity, and depressive disorders), predicted body dissatisfaction in adolescence. In addition, childhood perceptual sensitivity and oppositional defiant and depressive disorders predicted AN symptoms. Demographic characteristics (female sex, lower levels of fathers' education, and parental marital status) in childhood predicted body dissatisfaction and AN symptoms. No temperament or psychopathology variables predicted BN symptoms. This study is an important first step toward continuing to identify areas of focus for future research on early childhood risk factors for ED symptoms and body dissatisfaction.
35138800|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurological and developmental disorder characterized by social and communication difficulties. Valproic acid (VPA) injection during pregnancy elicits autism-like behavior in the offspring, making it a classic animal model of ASD. However, the mechanisms involved have not yet been determined. In this study, we used iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification) proteomics analysis of the cerebral cortex of a VPA rat model (VPA group) and controls (CON group). The results showed that 79 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified between the VPA group and the CON group. Based on bioinformatics analysis, the DEPs were mainly enriched at synapses, especially glutamatergic synapses and GABAergic synapses. Some DEPs were involved in energy metabolism, thyroid hormone synthesis pathway, and Na+-K+-ATPase. Cytoskeleton and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-related proteins were also involved. Some DEPs matched either the ASD gene database or previous reports on cerebral cortical transcriptome studies in VPA rat models. Dysregulation of these DEPs in the cerebral cortex of VPA rats may be responsible for autism-like behavior in rats. We also found that some DEPs were associated with neuropsychiatric disorders, implying that these diseases share common signaling pathways and mechanisms. Moreover, increased expression of DEPs was associated with energy metabolism in the cerebral cortex of VPA rats, implying that ASD may be a distinct type of mitochondrial dysfunction that requires further investigation.
35138559|a|The objective of the study was to validate adapted versions of the Glasgow Anxiety Scale for people with Intellectual Disabilities (GAS-ID) simultaneously developed in English and French. A sample of 361 youth with mild to moderate intellectual disability (ID) (M = 15.78 years) from Australia (English-speaking) and Canada (French-speaking) participated in this study. The results supported the factor validity and reliability, measurement invariance (between English and French versions), a lack of differential items functioning (as a function of youth's age and ID level, but not sex in the English-Australian sample), temporal stability (over one year interval), and convergent validity (with global self-esteem and school loneliness) of a bi-factor exploratory structural equation modeling representation of the GAS-ID. The present study supports the psychometric properties of the English-Australian and French-Canadian versions of the adapted GAS-ID.
35138558|a|This study provided preliminary validation of the Autism Detection in Early Childhood-Virtual (ADEC-V) for telehealth assessment of possible autism. Participants were 121 children (24.79% female) aged 18-47 months who completed telehealth evaluations at a large pediatric hospital in the Midwestern United States between October 2020 and February 2021. The ADEC-V showed good sensitivity (0.82) and specificity (0.78) and was significantly correlated with other ASD symptom measures (i.e., CARS-2, ADI-R). Internal consistency was acceptable (alpha = 0.77). These results need replication in a larger and broader sample including more children without ASD. This preliminary validation study identifies the ADEC-V as a promising measure for telehealth ASD assessments in young children.
35138557|a|Studies have supported two different hypotheses of reduced eye gaze in people with ASD; gaze avoidance and gaze indifference, while less is known about the role of anxiety. We tested these hypotheses using an eye-tracking paradigm that cued the eyes or mouth of emotional faces. Autistic children (n = 12, mean age 7 years) looked faster away from both eyes and mouths than controls (n = 22). This effect was not explained by anxiety symptoms. No difference was found in latency towards either area. These results indicate that attentional avoidance of autistic children is not specific to eyes, and that they do not show attentional indifference to eyes compared to controls. Atypicalities in visual scanning in ASD are possibly unrelated to specific facial areas.
35138556|a|The transition to postsecondary education is characterized by many changes for adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). A data-based understanding of a student's readiness for postsecondary education could help students, and their parents, better prepare for this life transition. The Transition Readiness Scale (TRS) was created to address this need. The TRS is a self/other-report questionnaire used to assess postsecondary readiness across behavioral, cognitive, and emotional domains among adolescents 15-18 years of age. The present study details measure development and provides preliminary psychometric properties in a sample of transition-aged youth with ASD. Results indicate strong internal consistency, adequate item-level analyses, and discriminant and concurrent validity. Future validation of the TRS in large-scale field testing is merited to inform clinical interpretation.
35138025|a|Pathogenic variants in heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein U (HNRNPU) results in a novel neurodevelopmental disorder recently delineated. Here, we report on 17 previously unpublished patients carrying HNRNPU pathogenic variants. All patients were found to harbor de novo loss-of-function variants except for one individual where the inheritance could not be determined, as a parent was unavailable for testing. All patients had seizures which started in early childhood, global developmental delay, intellectual disability, and dysmorphic features. In addition, hypotonia, behavioral abnormalities (such as autistic features, aggression, anxiety, and obsessive-compulsive behaviors), and cardiac (septal defects) and/or brain abnormalities (ventriculomegaly and corpus callosum thinning/agenesis) were frequently observed. We have noted four recurrent variants in the literature (c.1089G>A p.(Trp363*), c.706_707del p.(Glu236Thrfs*6), c.847_857del p.(Phe283Serfs*5), and c.1681dels p.(Gln561Serfs*45)).
35137321|a|Increasing evidence from animal and epidemiological studies indicates that perinatal exposure to pesticides cause developmental neurotoxicity and may increase the risk for psychiatric disorders such as autism and intellectual disability. However, the underlying pathogenic mechanisms remain largely elusive. This work was aimed at testing the hypothesis that developmental exposure to different classes of pesticides hijacks intracellular neuronal signaling contributing to synaptic and behavioral alterations associated with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD). Low concentrations of organochlorine (dieldrin, endosulfan, and chlordane) and organophosphate (chlorpyrifos and its oxon metabolite) pesticides were chronically dosed ex vivo (organotypic rat hippocampal slices) or in vivo (perinatal exposure in rats), and then biochemical, electrophysiological, behavioral, and proteomic studies were performed. All the pesticides tested caused prolonged activation of MAPK/ERK pathway in a concentration-dependent manner. Additionally, some of them impaired metabotropic glutamate receptor-dependent long-term depression (mGluR-LTD). In the case of the pesticide chlordane, the effect was attributed to chronic modulation of MAPK/ERK signaling. These synaptic alterations were reproduced following developmental in vivo exposure to chlordane and chlorpyrifos-oxon, and were also associated with prototypical behavioral phenotypes of NDD, including impaired motor development, increased anxiety, and social and memory deficits. Lastly, proteomic analysis revealed that these pesticides differentially regulate the expression of proteins in the hippocampus with pivotal roles in brain development and synaptic signaling, some of which are associated with NDD. Based on these results, we propose a novel mechanism of synaptic dysfunction, involving chronic overactivation of MAPK and impaired mGluR-LTD, shared by different pesticides which may have important implications for NDD.
35137284|a|Environmental exposures to chemicals can disrupt gene expression, and the effects could be mediated by methylation. This investigation focused on methylation of genes associated with exposure to metals. Mother-child pairs from three locations in Montana were recruited, and buccal cells were collected for genome-wide methylation assay. Four pairs were from Butte, where there is mining and a Superfund site, four pairs were from Anaconda with a Superfund site, and four pairs were from Missoula with neither a mine nor a Superfund site. Principal component analysis, linear mixed models, hierarchical clustering and heatmap, and gene set enrichment analysis were used to visualize the profiles, identify the top associated methylation loci, and investigate the involved pathways. Distinctly higher or lower methylation in samples from Butte were found at the top differentially methylated loci. The 200 genes harboring the most hypermethylated loci were significantly enriched in genes involved in actin cytoskeleton regulation, ABC transporters, leukocyte transendothelial migration, focal adhesion, and adherens junction, which plays a role in pathogenesis of disease, including autism spectrum disorders. This study lays a foundation for inquiry about genetic changes associated with environmental exposure to metals for people living in proximity to Superfund and open pit mining.
35137235|a|BACKGROUND AND HYPOTHESIS: Evidence suggests that childhood maltreatment (ie, childhood abuse and childhood neglect) affects educational attainment and cognition. However, the association between childhood maltreatment and Intelligence Quotient (IQ) seems stronger among controls compared to people with psychosis. We hypothesised that: the association between childhood maltreatment and poor cognition would be stronger among community controls than among people with first-episode of psychosis (FEP); compared to abuse, neglect would show stronger associations with educational attainment and cognition; the association between childhood maltreatment and IQ would be partially accounted for by other risk factors; and the association between childhood maltreatment, educational attainment, and IQ would be stronger among patients with affective psychoses compared to those with nonaffective psychoses. STUDY DESIGN: 829 patients with FEP and 1283 community controls from 16 EU-GEI sites were assessed for child maltreatment, education attainment, and IQ. STUDY RESULTS: In both the FEP and control group, childhood maltreatment was associated with lower educational attainment. The association between childhood maltreatment and lower IQ was robust to adjustment for confounders only among controls. Whereas childhood neglect was consistently associated with lower attainment and IQ in both groups, childhood abuse was associated with IQ only in controls. Among both patients with affective and nonaffective psychoses, negative associations between childhood maltreatment and educational attainment were observed, but the crude association with IQ was only evident in affective psychoses. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings underscore the role of childhood maltreatment in shaping academic outcomes and cognition of people with FEP as well as controls.
35136359|a|Background: It has been well documented that social media use among adolescents is rising. However, most research has focused on social media use among typically developing adolescents and less on its use among adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The goal of this study was to compare the time spent as well as to identify the purpose of social media use in adolescents with ASD compared to non-ASD adolescents. Methods: This was a cross-sectional study of adolescents between ages 13-18 who were attending a hospital-based child and adolescents psychiatry clinic. Participants completed a self-report 18-item questionnaire to assess the pattern and reasons for using social media sites. The sample size was 26 for ASD and 24 for the non-ASD group. Results: We found that the time spent on social media among adolescents with ASD was comparable to those without ASD diagnosis. However, participants with ASD differed from their non-ASD counterparts in both preferred social media sites as well as reasons for use. The most favourable social media site for ASD adolescents was YouTube. In contrast, the preferred social media site among adolescents without ASD was Snapchat. About 92.3% of participants without ASD reported using social media sites for primarily social interactions. In contrast, 59.1% of participants with ASD reported entertainment purposes as their primary reason for choosing a social media site. Conclusion: Although the current study is based on a small sample of participants, the findings suggest that the pattern of usage and reasons for using social media differ significantly between the two groups. There is, therefore, a definite need for further research with a larger sample size to examine the implications of these differences and to determine how social media could be used as a tool for learning social skills and its efficacy and safety in the ASD population.
35136254|a|Background: The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic is thought to have greatly impacted families of individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) due to lockdown, given lack of access to healthcare, therapy, and day-care centers. This survey was conducted to understand the magnitude of the impact of lockdown, and its effect on the health and behavior of individuals with ASD and their families. Materials and Methods: We conducted an anonymous online survey, disseminated to families registered with our hospital and collaborating centers. The survey questionnaire collected information on sociodemographic details, details of the patient's and parents' behavior and health during the COVID-19 lockdown, and treatment details of the patient. Results: A total of 153 families completed the survey. Of the 153, nearly half of the individuals with ASD had an inadequate understanding of lockdown, 54% had increased screen-time, while a third reported new-onset behavioral changes. About 40% received online therapies, of which 85% reported benefits. Of the 132 who answered the parent's section, 55% reported decreased interest and/or pleasure in doing daily activities and 43% felt depressed and/or hopeless. About 80% of families reported short-term positive changes such as improved speech, language skills, and participation in household chores. Conclusion: The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted routines, triggered behavioral issues in individuals with ASD, and impacted the coping skills of both individuals and families, along with the mental health and well-being of the family. Valuable suggestions to improve therapy services and clinical care using technology have been uncovered and need to be explored.
35136228|a|Small average differences in the left-right asymmetry of cerebral cortical thickness have been reported in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) compared to typically developing controls, affecting widespread cortical regions. The possible impacts of these regional alterations in terms of structural network effects have not previously been characterized. Inter-regional morphological covariance analysis can capture network connectivity between different cortical areas at the macroscale level. Here, we used cortical thickness data from 1455 individuals with ASD and 1560 controls, across 43 independent datasets of the ENIGMA consortium's ASD Working Group, to assess hemispheric asymmetries of intra-individual structural covariance networks, using graph theory-based topological metrics. Compared with typical features of small-world architecture in controls, the ASD sample showed significantly altered average asymmetry of networks involving the fusiform, rostral middle frontal, and medial orbitofrontal cortex, involving higher randomization of the corresponding right-hemispheric networks in ASD. A network involving the superior frontal cortex showed decreased right-hemisphere randomization. Based on comparisons with meta-analyzed functional neuroimaging data, the altered connectivity asymmetry particularly affected networks that subserve executive functions, language-related and sensorimotor processes. These findings provide a network-level characterization of altered left-right brain asymmetry in ASD, based on a large combined sample. Altered asymmetrical brain development in ASD may be partly propagated among spatially distant regions through structural connectivity.
35136157|a|The risk of neurodevelopmental disorders in low birth weight (LBW) infants has gained recognition but remains debatable. We investigated the risk of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in school-aged children according to their birth weight. We conducted a retrospective cohort study using the Korean National Health Insurance claims data of 2,143,652 children who were born between 2008 and 2012. Gestational age of infants was not available; thus, outcomes were not adjusted with it. Not only infants with birth weights of < 1.5 kg, but also 2.0-2.4 kg and 1.5-1.9 kg were associated with having ADHD; odds ratio (OR), 1.41 (95% confidence interval [CI] 1.33-1.50), and 1.49 (95% CI 1.33-1.66), respectively. The OR in infants with birth weights of 2.0-2.4 kg and 1.5-1.9 kg was 1.91 (95% CI 1.79-2.05) and 3.25 (95% CI 2.95-3.59), respectively, indicating increased odds of having ASD. Subgroup analysis for children without perinatal diseases showed similar results. In this national cohort, infants with birth weights of < 2.5 kg were associated with ADHD and ASD, regardless of perinatal history. Children born with LBW need detailed clinical follow-up.
35136021|a|Autistic traits represent a continuum dimension across the population, with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) being the extreme end of the distribution. Accumulating evidence shows that neuroanatomical and neurofunctional profiles described in relatives of ASD individuals reflect an intermediate neurobiological pattern between the clinical population and healthy controls. This suggests that quantitative measures detecting autistic traits in the general population represent potential candidates for the development of biomarkers identifying early pathophysiological processes associated with ASD. Functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) has been extensively employed to investigate neural development and function. In contrast, the potential of fNIRS to define reliable biomarkers of brain activity has been barely explored. Features of non-invasiveness, portability, ease of administration, and low-operating costs make fNIRS a suitable instrument to assess brain function for differential diagnosis, follow-up, analysis of treatment outcomes, and personalized medicine in several neurological conditions. Here, we introduce a novel standardized procedure with high entertaining value to measure hemodynamic responses (HDR) in the occipital cortex of adult subjects and children. We found that the variability of evoked HDR correlates with the autistic traits of children, assessed by the Autism-Spectrum Quotient. Interestingly, HDR amplitude was especially linked to social and communication features, representing the core symptoms of ASD. These findings establish a quick and easy strategy for measuring visually-evoked cortical activity with fNIRS that optimize the compliance of young subjects, setting the background for testing the diagnostic value of fNIRS visual measurements in the ASD clinical population.
35135902|a|Neurodevelopmental disorders are complex conditions that pose difficulty in the modulation of proper motor, sensory and cognitive function due to dysregulated neuronal development. Previous studies have reported that an imbalance in the excitation/ inhibition (E/I) in the brain regulated by glutamatergic and/or GABAergic neurotransmission can cause neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric behavioral deficits such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD). NMDA acts as an agonist at the NMDA receptor and imitates the action of the glutamate on that receptor. NMDA however, unlike glutamate, only binds to and regulates the NMDA receptor subtypes and not the other glutamate receptors. This study seeks to determine whether NMDA administration in mice i.e., over-activation of the NMDA system would result in long-lasting behavioral deficits in the adolescent mice. Both gender mice were treated with NMDA or saline at early postnatal developmental period with significant synaptogenesis and synaptic maturation. On postnatal day 28, various behavioral experiments were conducted to assess and identify behavioral characteristics. NMDAtreated mice show social deficits, and repetitive behavior in both gender mice at adolescent periods. However, only the male mice but not female mice showed increased locomotor activity. This study implies that neonatal exposure to NMDA may illicit behavioral features similar to ASD. This study also confirms the validity of the E/I imbalance theory of ASD and that NMDA injection can be used as a pharmacologic model for ASD. Future studies may explore the mechanism behind the gender difference in locomotor activity as well as the human relevance and therapeutic significance of the present findings.
20301745|a|CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The cerebral creatine deficiency syndromes (CCDS), inborn errors of creatine metabolism, include the two creatine biosynthesis disorders, guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GAMT) deficiency and L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT) deficiency, and the creatine transporter (CRTR) deficiency. Intellectual disability and seizures are common to all three CCDS. The majority of individuals with GAMT deficiency have a behavior disorder that can include autistic behaviors and self-mutilation; about 40% have movement disorder. Onset is between ages three months and three years. Only 14 individuals with AGAT deficiency have been reported. The phenotype of CRTR deficiency in affected males ranges from mild intellectual disability and speech delay to severe intellectual disability, seizures, movement disorder and behavior disorder; age at diagnosis ranges from two to 66 years. Clinical phenotype of females heterozygous for CRTR deficiency ranges from asymptomatic to severe phenotype resembling male phenotype. DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Cerebral creatine deficiency in brain MR spectroscopy ((1)H-MRS) is the characteristic hallmark of all CCDS. Diagnosis of CCDS relies on: measurement of guanidinoacetate (GAA), creatine, and creatinine in urine and plasma; and molecular genetic testing of the three genes involved, GAMT, GATM, and SLC6A8. If molecular genetic test results are inconclusive, GAMT enzyme activity (in cultured fibroblast or lymphoblasts), GATM enzyme activity (in lymphoblasts), or creatine uptake in cultured fibroblasts can be assessed. MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: GAMT deficiency and AGAT deficiency are treated with oral creatine monohydrate to replenish cerebral creatine levels. Treatment of GAMT deficiency requires supplementation of ornithine and dietary restriction of arginine or protein. In males with CRTR deficiency creatine supplementation alone does not improve clinical outcome and does not result in replenished cerebral creatine levels; likewise, high-dose L-arginine and L-glycine supplementation so far has not consistently improve clinical or biochemical outcome in males although some have been reported to have increased muscle mass and improved motor and personal social IQ skills. One female with intractable epilepsy responded to high-dose L-arginine and L-glycine supplementation with cessation of seizures. Prevention of primary manifestations: Early treatment at the asymptomatic stage of the disease in individuals with GAMT and AGAT deficiencies appears to be beneficial: treatment in newborn sibs of individuals with AGAT or GAMT deficiency prevented disease manifestations. Surveillance: In those treated with creatine monohydrate, routine measurement of renal function to detect possible creatine-associated nephropathy is warranted. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Early diagnosis of neonates at risk for GAMT deficiency, AGAT deficiency, and CRTR deficiency by biochemical or molecular genetic testing allows for early diagnosis and treatment of the defects in creatine metabolism. GENETIC COUNSELING: GAMT deficiency and AGAT deficiency are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At conception, each sib of an individual with GAMT deficiency or AGAT deficiency has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. CRTR deficiency is inherited in an X-linked manner. Mothers who are carriers have a 50% chance of transmitting the pathogenic variant in each pregnancy; sons who inherit the pathogenic variant will be affected; daughters who inherit the pathogenic variant will be heterozygous and may have learning and behavior problems. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk are possible for all three defects in creatine metabolism if the pathogenic variants in the family are known.
35134716|a|In common with the increase in environmental pollution in the past 10 years, there has also been a recent increase in the prevalence of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). In this regard, we hypothesized that exposure to microplastics is a potential risk factor for ASD. To evaluate the validity of this hypothesis, we initially examined the accumulation of polyethylene (PE) in the brains of mice and then assessed the behavioral effects using mouse models at different life stages, namely, prenatal, post-weaning, puberty, and adult models. Based on typical behavioral assessments of autistic traits in the model mice, we established that ASD-like traits were induced in mice after PE feeding. In addition, we examined the induction of ASD-like traits in response to microplastic exposure using positron emission tomography, magnetic resonance spectroscopy, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, microarray, and microbiome analysis. We believe these findings provide evidence in microplastics as a potential risk factor for ASD.
35134694|a|Herein, we report the generation of a human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line from an autism spectrum disorder (ASD) patient carrying the c.1998delT mutation in GRIA2 gene. The generated iPSC line exhibits normal karyotype, pluripotency markers and was able to differentiate into three germ layers. The iPSC line retained the GRIA2 mutation (c.1998delT), which could provide a valuable resource for investing pathogenic mechanisms underlying ASD and facilitating the development of targeted medicine.
35134689|a|The transition from childhood to adolescence is marked by significant changes in peer interactions. However, limited research has examined the brain systems (e.g., mentalizing and reward networks) involved in direct peer interaction, particularly during childhood and early adolescence. Here, we analyzed fMRI data from 50 children aged 8-12 years while they participated in a task in which they chatted with a peer (Peer) or answered questions about a story character (Character). Using a beta-series correlation analysis, we investigated how social interaction modulates functional connectivity within and between mentalizing and reward networks and whether this modulation changes with age. We observed effects of social interaction on functional connectivity were modulated by age within the mentalizing and reward networks. Further, greater connectivity within and between these networks during social interaction was related to faster reaction time to the Peer versus Character condition. Similar effects were found in the salience and mirror neuron networks. These findings provide insights into age-related differences in how the brain supports social interaction, and thus have the potential to advance our understanding of core social difficulties in social-communicative disorders, such as autism spectrum disorder.
35134379|a|BACKGROUND: There has been increasing attention on the associations between ambient particulate matter (PM) in early-life and neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). However, the associations remained unclear when considering different types of NDDs and different sizes of PM, and vulnerable exposure windows during early-life were not identified yet. OBJECTIVE: To synthesize the published literature on the associations between ambient particulate matter (PM) and risk of different types of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) in a systematic review and meta-analysis. METHODS: A systematic search of Medline, Embase, PubMed, Cochrane Library, and Web of Science was performed from inception through 24 January 2022. Two reviewers conducted the study selection, data extraction, and quality appraisal. A random-effects model was used for meta-analyses with two quality-of-evidence assessments (the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation system and the best evidence synthesis system). RESULTS: A total of 6554 articles were screened, of which 31 were included in the review, and 20 provided adequate data for meta-analyses. Exposures to particulate matter of 2.5 mum or less (PM2.5) during prenatal periods (OR, 1.32 [95%CI, 1.03-1.69]), the first year after birth (OR, 1.62 [95%CI, 1.22-2.15]) and the second year after birth (OR, 3.13 [95%CI, 1.47-6.67]) were associated with increased risk of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) in children. The quality of evidence for these associations during early postnatal periods was somewhat moderate with limited studies. We found inconsistent evidence when considering other types of NDDs and different sizes of PM. CONCLUSIONS: and Relevance: Current evidence indicated that there might be an association between PM2.5 exposure and higher risk of ASD, and early postnatal periods appeared to be the critical exposure window. High-quality studies are needed to assess the evidence for other types of NDDs.
35134248|a|BACKGROUND: Children with identified developmental disabilities (IDD) experience a higher risk of growth retardation. Anthropometric indicator is one common objective measurement used to determine malnutrition in those children. A comprehensive nutritional assessment tool should be introduced to offer a more robust approach in understanding their nutritional problems. OBJECTIVE: To determine the use of Subjective Global Nutrition Assessment (SGNA) as a nutrition assessment tool for children with IDD in comparison to the anthropometric indicators. METHODS: This cross-sectional study was conducted in local community settings. IDD included in this study were autism spectrum disorder (ASD), Down syndrome (DS) and cerebral palsy (CP). SGNA and anthropometry measurements including weight, height, mid-upper arm circumference and triceps skinfolds were performed on 93 children with IDD (40 ASD, 26 DS and 27 CP) aged 5-18 years. Cohen's Kappa, sensitivity, specificity and its 95% confidence interval were calculated between SGNA and anthropometric indicators for the agreement in determining malnutrition status of the children. RESULTS: SGNA identified a lower prevalence of malnutrition in children with IDD in comparison to the use of anthropometric indicators. SGNA obtained a moderate-to-fair agreement (above 80% agreement, except height-for-age parameter) and sensitivity (25.71-59.09%) against the use of a single anthropometric indicator in identifying the malnutrition status of the children. CONCLUSIONS: The use of SGNA as an adjunct to body mass index-for-age as an anthropometric measurement for diagnosing malnutrition in children and adolescents with IDD is recommended.
35134082|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) affects two percent of American children and often results in neophobia, hypersensitivity to foods, and firmly set food preferences, leading to higher proportions of individuals suffering from diet-related chronic diseases. Our objective was to conduct an explorative pilot study to examine parents' perception of food intake for themselves and their young adult children with ASD. We employed comparative analysis to discover potential pathways to improve diet quality and lower the risk for chronic disease in individuals with ASD. Data from an online survey in n = 493 parent-child dyads on parentally reported intake patterns, food group, and food consumption was analyzed using kappa statistics to determine the level of agreement between reported parental and child intake patterns, body weight status and activity level. Average age was 48 years for parents and 22 years for their children, respectively. Parent-child agreement for obesity was high. We found very strong agreement between the reported diet variety (kappa = 0.82) and changing daily intake (kappa = 0.63) and strong agreement for some vegetable intake patterns (kappa = 0.61 for orange, white, and starchy vegetables) but not in meat intake (no agreement). Results of this study indicate evidence for perceived intergenerational transfer of dietary intake patterns, which may offer effective approaches to change parental diet, to subsequently improve diet quality in young adults with ASD and prevent diet-related chronic diseases in individuals with ASD.
35133855|a|PURPOSE: In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is critical to understand the feasibility and acceptability of the use of telediagnostic assessments in clinical settings. This study aimed to characterize caregiver satisfaction with a telediagnostic assessment of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). METHOD: Twelve families completed a telediagnostic assessment of ASD through Illinois' Early Intervention program including a caregiver interview, administration of the TELE-ASD-PEDS, and a feedback visit. Following the evaluation, caregivers rated their satisfaction with the telediagnostic assessment. RESULTS: Caregivers reported that the evaluation met their expectations, and they were satisfied with the assessment and feedback visit. However, caregiver satisfaction with the telehealth platform varied, and the majority of caregivers reported a preference for in-person visits. Qualitative analysis of caregiver responses noted the benefits and areas of improvement of telediagnostic assessment. Thematic analysis revealed the strengths of the telediagnostic assessment, including the logistical convenience of the teleassessment, ease of administration, rapport with and expertise of the clinicians, and qualification for intervention services. Although caregivers' perspectives varied, diagnostic accuracy and the amount of information provided about the diagnosis were reported areas of improvement. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, telediagnostic assessments were well received by families. Caregivers' preference for in-person visits highlights the need to incorporate caregiver-reported areas of improvement in the development and administration of telediagnostic assessments.
35133547|a|d/Deaf or hard of hearing (d/Dhh) students with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) may require specific approaches to promote social inclusion. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of reading social stories with American Sign Language vocabulary to students who are d/Dhh with ASD (d/Dhh-ASD) and their peers in inclusive settings, using a non-concurrent multiple baseline design across participants. To examine the effectiveness of the intervention, the frequency of four communicative social behaviors and the duration of social engagement with peers were recorded for each participant during lunchtime and recess. The results did not show an immediate effect across all participants. Implications for promoting social inclusion for students who are d/Dhh-ASD in general education classrooms are discussed.
35133546|a|Studies of the general population suggest that the risk for mental health difficulties conferred by dispositional behavioural inhibition (BI) may be modified by self-regulation; however, this possibility has not been explored in the context of autism. This study investigated the moderating effects of attentional-, activation-, and inhibitory control on the relationship between childhood BI and anxiety and depression among 47 autistic youths (55% male, Mage = 19.09 years, SD = 2.23). Childhood BI was associated with anxiety at low but not high levels of attentional- and activation control, and depression at low but not high levels of attentional control. However, there were no moderating effects of inhibitory control. These preliminary findings are partially consistent with those from the general population and point to avenues for future work.
35133277|a|Adenylosuccinate Lyase (ADSL) functions in de novo purine biosynthesis (DNPS) and the purine nucleotide cycle. ADSL deficiency (ADSLD) causes numerous neurodevelopmental pathologies, including microcephaly and autism spectrum disorder. ADSLD patients have normal serum purine nucleotide levels but exhibit accumulation of dephosphorylated ADSL substrates, S-Ado and SAICAr, the latter being implicated in neurotoxic effects through unknown mechanisms. We examined the phenotypic effects of ADSL depletion in human cells and their relation to phenotypic outcomes. Using specific interventions to compensate for reduced purine levels or modulate SAICAr accumulation, we found that diminished AMP levels resulted in increased DNA damage signaling and cell cycle delays, while primary ciliogenesis was impaired specifically by loss of ADSL or administration of SAICAr. ADSL deficient chicken and zebrafish embryos displayed impaired neurogenesis and microcephaly. Neuroprogenitor attrition in zebrafish embryos was rescued by pharmacological inhibition of DNPS, but not increased nucleotide concentration. Zebrafish also displayed phenotypes commonly linked to ciliopathies. Our results suggest that both reduced purine levels and impaired DNPS contribute to neurodevelopmental pathology in ADSLD and that defective ciliogenesis may influence the ADSLD phenotypic spectrum.
35132529|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is reportedly more prevalent in urban areas partly because of better accessibility and affordability to healthcare. With universal health insurance coverage in Taiwan, a previous study has shown no urban-rural disparity in the utilization rate of a child's preventive healthcare. Under this circumstance, we followed a birth cohort of 176,273 live births from 2006 to 2015 to detect the differences in ASD incidence between urbanicities. After adjusting for socioeconomic factors, children were 1.28 (95% confidence interval (CI): 1.13-1.44) and 1.54 (95% CI: 1.36-1.75) more likely to acquire ASD in satellite and urban areas compared with those in rural areas, respectively. A gradient association between parental educational attainment and ASD incidence was also noted. Greater ASD incidences in more urbanized areas and more advanced educated parents' children were detected under a circumstance with low barriers to healthcare.
35132414|a|Major cell entry factors of SARS-CoV-2 are present in neurons; however, the neurotropism of SARS-CoV-2 and the phenotypes of infected neurons are still unclear. Acute neurological disorders occur in many patients, and one-third of COVID-19 survivors suffer from "brain diseases". Here, we show that SARS-CoV-2 invades the brains of five patients with COVID-19 and Alzheimer's, autism, frontotemporal dementia or no underlying condition by infecting neurons and other cells in the cortex. SARS-CoV-2 induces or enhances Alzheimer's-like neuropathology with manifestations of beta-amyloid aggregation and plaque formation, tauopathy, neuroinflammation and cell death. SARS-CoV-2 infects mature but not immature neurons derived from inducible pluripotent stem cells from healthy and Alzheimer's individuals through its receptor ACE2 and facilitator neuropilin-1. SARS-CoV-2 triggers Alzheimer's-like gene programs in healthy neurons and exacerbates Alzheimer's neuropathology. A gene signature defined as an Alzheimer's infectious etiology is identified through SARS-CoV-2 infection, and silencing the top three downregulated genes in human primary neurons recapitulates the neurodegenerative phenotypes of SARS-CoV-2. Thus, SARS-CoV-2 invades the brain and activates an Alzheimer's-like program.
35132042|a|OBJECTIVE: Individuals with developmental conditions, such as autism, experience stigma, which is reflected in derogatory language and labels. To limit stigma associated with disabilities, government agencies and medical organizations have adopted the use of person-centered language (PCL). This study investigated adherence to PCL guidelines among peer-reviewed research publications focused on autism. In addition, we investigated the co-occurrence of stigmatizing language in articles using person-first language (PFL) and identity-first language (IFL) styles. METHODS: We performed a systematic search of PubMed for autism-focused articles from January 2019 to May 2020. Articles from journals with more than 20 search returns were included, and a random sample of 700 publications were screened and examined for inclusion of prespecified, non-PCL terminology. RESULTS: Of the 315 publications, 156 (49.5%) were PCL compliant. Articles frequently used PCL and non-PCL terminology concomitantly, and 10% of publications included obsolete nomenclature. A logistic regression model showed the odds were more likely that publications using IFL were more likely to include other stigmatizing terminology than publications using PFL (odds ratio = 2.03, 95% confidence interval: 1.15-3.58). CONCLUSION: Within medical research, the language to describe individuals and populations needs to be used with intentionality and acknowledges that individuals are more than the diagnosis under study. This may reduce the structural stigma that may be implied otherwise. Our study showed that when PFL is used when addressing individuals with autism, other more stigmatizing language is often avoided and is in line with medical education and clinical practice.
35131856|a|For more than half a century, Denmark has maintained population-wide demographic, health care, and socioeconomic registers that provide detailed information on the interaction between all residents and the extensive national social services system. We leverage this resource to reconstruct the genealogy of the entire nation based on all individuals legally residing in Denmark since 1968. We cross-reference 6,691,426 individuals with nationwide health care registers to estimate heritability and genetic correlations of 10 broad diagnostic categories involving all major organs and systems. Heritability estimates for mental disorders were consistently the highest across demographic cohorts (average h 2 = 0.406, 95% CI = [0.403, 0.408]), whereas estimates for cancers were the lowest (average h 2 = 0.130, 95% CI = [0.125, 0.134]). The average genetic correlation of each of the 10 diagnostic categories with the other nine was highest for gastrointestinal conditions (average rg = 0.567, 95% CI = [0.566, 0.567]) and lowest for urogenital conditions (average rg = 0.386, 95% CI = [0.385, 0.388]). Mental, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, and neurological conditions had similar genetic correlation profiles.
35131524|a|Fetal exposure to testosterone may contribute to vulnerability for autism spectrum disorder (ASD). It is hypothesized that placental aromatase prevents fetal exposure to maternal testosterone, however, this pathway and the implications for child neurodevelopment have not been fully explored. We examined the relationships between prenatal maternal testosterone and estradiol at 19.2 +- 1.3 weeks, cord blood testosterone and estradiol at birth, placental aromatase mRNA expression, and neurodevelopment using the Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ), the Behavioral Assessment System for Children, 3rd Edition (BASC-3), and the Empathizing Quotient for Children (EQ-C) at 4.5-6.5 years of age in a sample of 270 Nulliparous-Mothers-to-be (nuMoM2b) study participants. Maternal testosterone levels were positively associated with SCQ scores, but the association was not significant after adjusting for maternal age at delivery, nor was there a significant interaction with sex. Maternal estradiol levels were negatively associated with BASC-3 Clinical Probability scores among males (n = 139). We report a significant interaction effect of cord blood testosterone and fetal sex on both total SCQ scores and t-scores on the Developmental Social Disorders subscale. Placental aromatase was not associated with any neurodevelopmental or hormone measure, but under conditions of low placental aromatase expression, high maternal testosterone was positively associated with SCQ scores in males (n = 46). No other associations between hormone levels and neurodevelopment were significant. Our findings provide a foundation for further investigation of the mechanisms through which maternal sex hormones and placental steroidogenesis may affect fetal hormone production and neurobehavior.
35131520|a|BACKGROUND: Although neuroimaging research has identified atypical neuroanatomical substrates in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), it is at present unclear whether and to what extent disorder-selective gray matter (GM) alterations occur in this spectrum of conditions. In fact, a growing body of evidence shows a substantial overlap between the pathomorphological changes across different brain diseases, which may complicate identification of reliable neural markers and differentiation of the anatomical substrates of distinct psychopathologies. METHODS: Using a novel data-driven and Bayesian methodology with published voxel-based morphometry data (849 peer-reviewed experiments and 22,304 clinical subjects), this study performs the first reverse inference investigation to explore the selective structural brain alteration profile of ASD. RESULTS: We found that specific brain areas exhibit a > 90% probability of GM alteration selectivity for ASD: the bilateral precuneus (BAs 7), right inferior occipital gyrus (BA 18), left cerebellar lobule IX and Crus II, right cerebellar lobule VIIIA, and right Crus I. Of note, many brain voxels that are selective for ASD include areas that are posterior components of the default mode network. CONCLUSIONS: The identification of these spatial GM alteration patterns offers new insights into understanding the complex neurobiological underpinnings of ASD, and opens attractive prospects for future neuroimaging-based interventions.
35131336|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder of heterogenous etiology exhibiting a challenge in understanding its exact neuro-pathophysiology. Recently, peroxisome proliferator activated receptor (PPAR)-alpha activation was found to play a fundamental role in neuroprotection and improving autistic-like-behaviors in experimental animal models of ASD through alleviating neuroinflammation, oxidative-stress, astrocyte reactivity, tauopathy in addition to its favorable role in metabolic regulation, thus attracting attention as a possible target in treatment of ASD. This study aimed to investigate the role of PPAR-alpha, astrocytic dysfunction and tauopathy in ASD and detect the possible neuroprotective effects of metformin (MET), through PPAR-alpha activation, and risperidone (RIS) either monotherapy or in combination in alleviating autistic-like-changes at behavioral and neurobiological levels in male Wistar rats. Pregnant female Wistar rats received valproic-acid (VPA) to induce autistic-like-behavioral and neurobiological alterations in their offspring. Chronic intra-peritoneal MET (100 mg/kg/day) and RIS (1 mg/kg/day) either monotherapy or in combination started from postnatal day (PND) 24 till PND61 (38 days). Prenatal VPA exposure simulated the autistic core behaviors associated with neurochemical and histopathological neurodevelopmental degenerative changes. Both MET and RIS either monotherapy or in combination were able to reverse these changes. The effect of MET was comparable to RIS. Moreover, MET was able to alleviate the RIS induced weight gain and improve cognitive functions highlighting its promising adjunctive role in alleviating ASD pathophysiology. Our study highlighted the favorable effects of MET and RIS both in monotherapy and in combination in alleviating the autistic-like-changes and proposed PPAR-alpha activation along with restoring astrocytes homeostasis as promising targets in novel therapeutic strategies in ASD.
35131297|a|Defensive behavior, a group of responses that evolved due to threatening stimuli, is crucial for animal survival in the natural environment. For defensive measures to be timely and successful, a high arousal state and immediate sleep-to-wakefulness transition are required. Recently, the glutamatergic basal forebrain (BF) has been implicated in sleep-wake regulation; however, the associated physiological functions and underlying neural circuits remain unknown. Here, using in vivo fiber photometry, we found that BF glutamatergic neuron is activated by various threatening stimuli, including predator odor, looming threat, sound, and tail suspension. Optogenetic activation of BF glutamatergic neurons induced a series of context-dependent defensive behaviors in mice, including escape, fleeing, avoidance, and hiding. Similar to the effects of activated BF glutamatergic cell body, photoactivation of BF glutamatergic terminals in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) strongly drove defensive behaviors in mice. Using synchronous electroencephalogram (EEG)/electromyogram (EMG) recording, we showed that photoactivation of the glutamatergic BF-VTA pathway produced an immediate transition from sleep to wakefulness and significantly increased wakefulness. Collectively, our results clearly demonstrated that the glutamatergic BF is a key neural substrate involved in wakefulness and defensive behaviors, and encodes these behaviors through glutamatergic BF-VTA pathway. Overexcitation of the glutamatergic BF-VTA pathway may be implicated in clinical psychiatric diseases characterized by exaggerated defensive responses, such as autism spectrum disorders.
35131262|a|During brain development, neural circuits are formed through cellular differentiation, cell migration, axon guidance, and synaptogenic processes by the coordinated actions of many genes. Abnormalities in neural development, especially connectivity defects, can result in psychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia and autism. Recent advances in diffusion tensor imaging have enabled us to examine the brain's macroscopic nerve trajectories. In this study, we investigated the abnormalities of the commissural fibers that connect the left and right cerebral hemispheres in mice lacking heparan sulfate 6-O endosulfatases, Sulf1 and Sulf2 (Sulf1/2), which are extracellular enzymes that remove 6-O sulfate from heparan sulfate and thereby modulate the function of axon guidance factors. We previously demonstrated that Sulf1/2 double knockout (DKO) mouse embryos harbored defects in their corticospinal tract and that some of these DKO mice experienced corpus callosum agenesis. However, abnormalities of the commissural fibers in the adult DKO brain have not been systematically assessed. In this study, we investigated commissural fiber abnormalities in these mice by the combined use of radiological and histological analyses. First, we acquired diffusion-weighted images and three-dimensional-T2 weighted images of adult brains using a 9.4 T animal magnetic resonance imaging system and found that Sulf1/2 DKO mice had a smaller corpus callosum and dorsal hippocampal commissure. Next, we performed myelin staining and anterograde tracing, revealing that the dorsal hippocampal commissure was elongated in a rostral direction. These results suggest that Sulf1/2 play an important role in the formation of commissural tracts and that diffusion tensor imaging associated with microscopic analysis is a powerful tool to clarify nerve tract abnormalities.
35130871|a|PURPOSE: This study aimed to identify the factors related to treatment adherence behaviors among old-age hemodialysis patients in Hamadan based on the Extended Theory of Planned Behavior (ETPB) during the covid-19 pandemic. METHODS: This cross-sectional study was conducted from January to March 2021 in Hamadan, Iran. 191 hemodialysis patients were recruited who were referred to hemodialysis centers via the census method. Data were collected by a questionnaire containing items on socio-demographic information, End-Stage Renal Disease Adherence (ESRD-Adherence) Questionnaire, and ETPB constructs scale. Data analysis was performed using descriptive statistics and structural equation modeling. RESULTS: The mean (SD) age of participants was 62.49 (10.66). Also, the mean (SD) hemodialysis vintage/Month of them was 36.56 (43.34). Moreover, Treatment Adherence Behaviors are associated with education level, sex, and marital status (p < 0.001). Besides, Perceive Behavior Control (beta = 0.414, t-value = 3.810) associated with intention. Also, intention (beta = 0.158, t-value = 1.976) was associated to adherence behaviors. No significant associations were observed between positive attitudes, subjective norms, a perceived threat with intention, and adherence behaviors. The model explained about 54% of the variance of adherence behaviors. Finally, the goodness of fit index of 0.78, indicating the model good fit. CONCLUSION: The present study demonstrates that some of the ETPB constructs such as perceived behavior control and intention are useful to improve adherence among the oldest hemodialysis patients. Also. This framework is revealed alongside the theory of planned behavior (TPB) applicable in the treatment adherence of old-age hemodialysis patients.
35130016|a|The present study sought to use a paradigm that allows the study of mental representations of observed actions. We investigated whether retrieval of observationally acquired stimulus-response bindings are impaired in participants with high (compared with low) autistic traits. In an extreme group comparison, participants with high versus low autistic traits worked through an observational SR binding and a standard SR binding task (to control for general deficits in cognitive performance). As expected, groups did not differ with regard to retrieval of transient bindings between stimuli and self-performed responses (standard SR binding & retrieval effects). Against our expectations, the same was true for the retrieval of observationally acquired SR bindings, which was of comparable magnitude in both high and low autistic trait groups. Bayes Factor analysis indicates that our evidence for this null finding has to be regarded as weak evidence. Our findings provide tentative evidence against the view that imitative effects are reduced (hypo-imitation) or increased (hyper-imitation) when autistic trait expression is high. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2022 APA, all rights reserved).
35129796|a|Previous studies have shown reduced attention to the eyes in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, most eye-tracking evidence regarding this impairment has been derived from passive viewing tasks. Here, we compared the passive viewing of faces with an active task involving face identification with morphing faces. While typical controls prioritized the eyes over other facial features regardless of viewing condition, autistic children exhibited reduced eye-looking in passive viewing, but displayed increased attention allocation to the eyes when instructed to identify faces. The proportional eye-looking in ASD during facial recognition was negatively related to the autism symptoms severity. These findings provide evidence regarding the specific situations in which diminished eye-looking may rise in young ASD children.
35128986|a|BACKGROUND: Many children with intellectual developmental disorders are insufficiently physically active and do not reach recommendations for physical activity. Pediatric healthcare providers play a key role in addressing these children's needs, including promoting interventions for physical activity. AIM: To explore pediatric healthcare providers' perceived needs, barriers, and facilitators for promoting physical activity for children with intellectual developmental disorders. METHODS: Semi-structured focus groups, analyzed using qualitative content analysis. Sixteen healthcare providers participated. RESULTS: Main findings are the importance of parental support and engagement, need for structure, and stakeholder collaboration to bridge the gap between pediatric organizations and external stakeholders. CONCLUSION: The study highlights the need for developing and implementing strategies to promote physical activity for children with intellectual developmental disorders in pediatric health care, and for producing guidelines regarding physical activity interventions for this vulnerable group.
35128834|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is associated with atypical visual processing and deficits in working memory (WM). Visual WM performance typically improves between childhood and adulthood, but such improvement may be atypical in ASD. To better understand how visual WM develops, we used a well-established change detection task across multiple visual features. We examined visual WM for color, shape, and pattern in children, adolescents, and adults with and without ASD. VWM capacity and performance for all visual features improved across age similarly for both the TD and ASD groups. While performance was better on set size 4 trials than set size 8 trials for color, shape, and no change trials, such an effect was not evident for pattern change trials. Overall, the present findings suggest that VWM for different visual features may be intact across development in ASD. The ability to hold multiple objects in mind (WM) improves across typical development, but it remains unclear whether such improvement occurs in ASD. We found that developmental improvements in WM for different types of object details (e.g., color, shape, and pattern) is generally similar for both ASD and typical development.
35128714|a|AIM: To describe Australian registered nurses' awareness, and implementation of reasonable adjustments within their practice when caring for people with intellectual disability and/or autism. Additionally, the association between key demographic, workforce, and respondent variables and familiarity of the term and regularity of use was explored. DESIGN: Cross-sectional survey. METHODS: Survey data were collected between August and October 2020 using an online survey tool. Data were analysed using descriptive and inferential statistics. RESULTS: Familiarity of the concept of reasonable adjustments was relatively low, compared to respondents who report applying adjustments when caring for people with intellectual disability and/or autism. Higher levels of confidence, comfort, and knowledge when caring for this cohort were associated with greater awareness and application of reasonable adjustments. CONCLUSION: A higher volume, and diversity in type of, nursing education related to care for people with intellectual disability and/or autism is indicated.
35128588|a|We examined how sharing autism research articles via social and news media was associated with citations and downloads. We included articles published in 2019 from three autism-focused journals. Every 10 Twitter shares yielded a 4.4% increase in article downloads and 5.2% increase in citations. Articles with at least one Facebook post had 23.3% more downloads than those without. Articles with at least one news story had 56.9% more downloads and 39.3% more citations than those without. Descriptive analysis indicated the most shared, downloaded, and cited articles focused largely on treatments or interventions. Autism researchers should continue sharing articles via Twitter and news media because it increases the reach of their work and may better engage research and autism community members.
35128533|a|Objective: Describe the association of health insurance coverage with the odds of mortality in an emergency department (ED) or hospital for adult victims of a motor vehicle crash. Methods: This cross-sectional study pooled and averaged 6 years of data, 2009-2014, from the Nationwide Emergency Department Sample (NEDS). Our analysis was restricted to patients 20-85 years old that were treated in an ED for an injury sustained from a motor vehicle traffic crash (N = 2,203,407 average annual hospital discharges). The outcome variables were whether the motor vehicle crash victim died in the ED or hospital. The predictor variable was health insurance status that was measured as uninsured, Medicare, Medicaid, private insurance, and other health insurance. Results: Most patients that died had some form of health insurance with less than a quarter classified as uninsured (23%). Nearly half of the patients that died had private insurance (48%) followed by Medicare (13%), Medicaid (9%), and other insurance (8%). Compared to the uninsured, the multivariate adjusted odds ratios (ORs) for death were significantly (P < 0.001) lower for Medicare (OR = 0.83, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.76-0.92), Medicaid (OR = 0.76, 95% CI = 0.69-0.84), private insurance (OR = 0.63, 95% CI = 0.58-0.68), and other insurance (OR = O.61, 95% CI = 0.54-0.70). Conclusion: After accounting for hospital and patient characteristics, lack of health insurance was associated with a higher likelihood of death for patients admitted to an ED or hospital for injuries sustained from a motor vehicle crash.
35128402|a|Background: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a wide range of behavioural disabilities for which there are no definite interventional modalities available. Remedial therapies remain the only option but with varying outcomes. We have evaluated the Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) and alpha-synuclein levels in this parallel-group, multiple-arm pilot clinical study after supplementation with a biological response modifier beta-glucan food supplement (Nichi Glucan). Methods: Six subjects with ASD (n=6) Gr. 1 underwent conventional treatment comprising remedial behavioural therapies and L-carnosine 500 mg per day, and 12 subjects (n=12) Gr. 2 underwent supplementation with the Nichi Glucan 0.5 g two times per day along with the conventional treatment. Results: There was a significant decrease in the CARS score in all of the children of the Nichi Glucan Gr.2 compared with the control (p=0.034517). Plasma levels of alpha-synuclein were significantly higher in Gr. 2 (Nichi Glucan) than in the control group Gr. 1 (p=0.091701). Conclusion: Improvement of the behavioural pattern CARS score and a correlating alpha-synuclein level, followed by a safe beta-glucan food supplement, warrants further research on other parameters, such as gut-microbiota evaluation, and relevant neuronal biomarkers which is likely to cast light on novel solutions.
35128353|a|Recent clinical studies report that chromosomal 12q24.31 microdeletions are associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellectual disability (ID). However, the causality and underlying mechanisms linking 12q24.31 microdeletions to ASD/ID remain undetermined. Here we show Kdm2b, one gene located in chromosomal 12q24.31, plays a critical role in maintaining neural stem cells (NSCs) in the mouse brain. Loss of the CxxC-ZF domain of KDM2B impairs its function in recruiting Polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1) to chromatin, resulting in de-repression of genes involved in cell apoptosis, cell-cycle arrest, NSC senescence, and loss of NSC populations in the brain. Of importance, the Kdm2b mutation is sufficient to induce ASD/ID-like behavioral and memory deficits. Thus, our study reveals a critical role of KDM2B in normal brain development, a causality between the Kdm2b mutation and ASD/ID-like phenotypes in mice, and potential molecular mechanisms linking the function of KDM2B-PRC1 in transcriptional regulation to the 12q24.31 microdeletion-associated ASD/ID.
35127178|a|Objective: This study aimed at examining the effectiveness of treating children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) who present with irritability, aggression, and disruptive behavior at the Sultan Qaboos University Hospital (SQUH) in Muscat, Oman, with risperidone, and to note any sex-based differences among this cohort. Method: This was a retrospective study conducted at the Department of Behavioral Medicine at SQUH over two years from January 2017 to December 2018. This study included all children aged 3 to 18 years attending the Child and Adolescent Mental Health Service (CAMHS) outpatient clinic with a diagnosis of ASD, based on the DSM-5 criteria, and comorbid disruptive behavior, who had been prescribed risperidone. Result: This study identified 95 ASD patients (72 males). Male patients' BMI score after 12 months of risperidone treatment showed an increase by 0.62 (1.57 SD; P=0.001); however, there was no significant change among female patients. Somnolence was noted in 69.6% of female patients as compared to 34.7% of males (P=0.003). Among those with a family history of ASD, 5 out of 17 patients had treatment success (29.4%), whereas 70 out of 78 patients (90.0%) who did not have a similar history had successful treatment. Conclusion: In conclusion, low-dose risperidone monotherapy is effective and well tolerated among some children with ASD who present with disruptive behavior in a naturalistic clinical setting. However, we found that some of the side effects, such as weight gain and somnolence, were concerning.
35127125|a|Background: Fussy eating has been associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), attention-deficit/hyperactive disorder (ADHD), anxiety, and depression. Despite these disorders being prevalent in obesity treatment, no studies have been published on the association of fussy eating in children with obesity and these disorders. Understanding fussy eating in children with obesity and comorbid disorders is important as acceptance of healthy foods tends to be low, especially in children with sensory sensitivities. Objectives: Investigate the prevalence of fussy eating in a cross-sectional sample of children with obesity and ASD, ADHD, anxiety, and depression; and whether they were more likely to be fussy eaters, comparing those with and without these disorders. Methods: One hundred and four children referred to family-based obesity treatment in Iceland 2011-2016, mean age 12.0 (SD = 3.0), mean body mass index standard deviation score 3.5 (SD = 0.9). Binary logistic regression was used to estimate the relationship between fussy eating and disorders, adjusting for medication use. Results: A large minority (41.6%) were fussy eaters and 48.9% had at least one comorbid disorder. Over a third of children rejected bitter and sour tastes, and 1.9% and 7.9% rejected sweet and salty tastes, respectively. Compared with those without disorders, the odds of being a fussy eater were increased by a factor of 4.11 when having anxiety (95% confidence intervals) (1.02-16.58, p = 00.046), adjusting for medication use. The odds of being a fussy eater were not increased for other disorders; ASD, ADHD, or depression. Conclusions: In children attending obesity treatment, fussy eating was common. Clinical care models in pediatric obesity treatment should address fussy eating, especially in children with anxiety.
35126773|a|Language comprehension requires the processing of both linguistic and extra-linguistic information, such as syntax, semantics, and pragmatic information. Previous studies have systematically examined the interplay between syntactic and semantic processing. However, there is a lack of data on how pragmatic processing proceeds and its interaction with semantic processing. Using event-related potentials (ERPs), the present study manipulated the semantic coherence of a verb phrase (VP) and the respect consistency of the object noun phrase in the VP, resulting in four types of critical sentences. Participants read 160 critical Chinese sentences and 220 filler sentences. After electroencephalogram recordings, they completed the Autism Quotient Communication (AQ-Comm) subscale and a sentence acceptability rating task. The ERP results showed that respect violation elicited a larger N400 response and a late negative activity in the pragmatically less-skilled subgroup (as indexed by higher scores on the AQ-Comm subscale). In contrast, respect violation elicited a P600 response in the pragmatically skilled subgroup (as indexed by lower scores on the AQ-Comm subscale). The double violation condition elicited an ERP pattern that was similar to that of the semantic violation condition in both subgroups, suggesting that respect violation effects were present only when the VP was semantically coherent. These results suggest that semantic violation can preclude readers from engaging in pragmatic inferencing, regardless of the participants' pragmatic skills. Strategies for resolving respect violation and corresponding brain activities vary according to participants' pragmatic abilities. Supplementary Information: The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s11571-021-09700-2.
35126770|a|Language processing is often an area of difficulty in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Semantic processing-the ability to add meaning to a stimulus-is thought to be especially affected in ASD. However, the neurological origin of these deficits, both structurally and temporally, have yet to be discovered. To further previous behavioral findings on language differences in ASD, the present study used an implicit semantic priming paradigm and electroencephalography (EEG) to compare the level of theta coherence throughout semantic processing, between typically developing (TD) and ASD participants. Theta coherence is an indication of synchronous EEG oscillations and was of particular interest due to its previous links with semantic processing. Theta coherence was analyzed in response to semantically related or unrelated pairs of words and pictures across bilateral short, medium, and long electrode connections. We found significant results across a variety of conditions, but most notably, we observed reduced coherence for language stimuli in the ASD group at a left fronto-parietal connection from 100 to 300 ms. This replicates previous findings of underconnectivity in left fronto-parietal language networks in ASD. Critically, the early time window of this underconnectivity, from 100 to 300 ms, suggests that impaired semantic processing of language in ASD may arise during pre-semantic processing, during the initial communication between lower-level linguistic processing and higher-level semantic processing. Our results suggest that language processing functions are unique in ASD compared to TD, and that subjects with ASD might rely on a temporally different language processing loop altogether.
35126275|a|Being a continental country, with over 210 million citizens, Brazil is similar to all of those who are part of the LAMIC (Low and middle income countries). It shows a big concentration of wealth, mainly in its south and southeast regions, as well as areas with immense poverty. In that sense, the health system also faces a huge amount of contrast. Inside University hospitals and facilities there are sophisticated tools and trained doctors prepared to assist in any kind of medical subject, including autism. But, unfortunately, at other times, the access to a good health system is made much harder. This results in many issues in the medical community, e.g., looking at the data regarding autism, there is a high average of the age of diagnosis. Another issue is the low number of professionals trained in ASD diagnosis and the few tools translated to Portuguese.
35126215|a|Gastrointestinal (GI) disorders are common in children with neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD). A limited understanding of the biologic factors that predispose this population to GI disorders has prevented development of individualized therapies to address this important medical issue. The goal of the current study was to determine if elements of the salivary micro-transcriptome could provide insight into the biologic perturbations unique to children with ASD-related GI disturbance. This cohort study included 898 children (ages 18-73 months) with ASD, non-ASD developmental delay (DD), or typical development (TD). The saliva micro-transcriptome of each child was assessed with RNA-seq. Outputs were aligned to microbial and human databases. A Kruskal Wallis analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to compare levels of 1821 micro-transcriptome features across neurodevelopmental status (ASD, DD, or TD) and GI presence or absence. An ANOVA was also used to compare micro-transcriptome levels among GI sub-groups (constipation, reflux, food intolerance, other GI condition, no GI condition), and to identify RNAs that differed among children taking three common GI medications (probiotics, reflux medication, or laxatives). Relationships between features identified in ANOVA testing were examined for associations with scores on the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule, 2nd Edition (ADOS-2) and the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales. GI disturbance rates were higher among children with ASD than peers with TD but were similar to those with DD. Five piwi-interacting RNAs and three microbial RNAs displayed an interaction between developmental status and GI disturbance. Fifty-seven salivary RNAs differed between GI sub-groups-with microRNA differences between food intolerance and reflux groups being most common. Twelve microRNAs displayed an effect of GI disturbance and showed association with GI medication uses and measures of behavior. These 12 microRNAs displayed enrichment for 13 physiologic pathways, including metabolism/digestion long-term depression, and neurobiology of addiction. This study identifies salivary micro-transcriptome features with differential expression among children with ASD-related GI disturbance. A subset of the RNAs displays relationships with treatment modality and are associated with autistic behaviors. The pathobiologic targets of the micro-transcriptome markers may serve as targets for individualized therapeutic interventions aimed at easing pain and behavioral difficulties seen in ASD-related GI disturbance.
35126213|a|Background: Early intervention and prevention of psychiatric comorbidities of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are urgent issues. However, the differences in the diagnoses of ASD and ADHD and psychiatric comorbidities associated with age, long-term healthcare utilization trajectories, and its associated diagnostic features have not been fully elucidated in Japan. Method: We conducted a retrospective observational study using the medical records. Member hospitals of three major consortiums of hospitals providing child and adolescent psychiatric services in Japan were recruited for the study. Children who accessed the psychiatry services of the participating hospitals in April 2015 were followed up for 5 years, and data on their clinical diagnoses, consultation numbers, and hospitalizations were collected. Non-hierarchical clustering was performed using two 10-timepoint longitudinal variables: consultation numbers and hospitalization. Among the major clusters, the differences in the prevalence of ASD, ADHD, comorbid intellectual disability, neurotic disorders, and other psychiatric disorders were assessed. Results: A total of 44 facilities participated in the study (59.5%), and 1,003 participants were enrolled. Among them, 591 diagnosed with ASD and/or ADHD (58.9%) and 589 without missing data were assessed. The mean age was 10.1 years, and 363 (70.9%) were boys. Compared with the pre-schoolers, the school-aged children and adolescents had fewer ASD, more ADHD, and fewer comorbid intellectual disability diagnoses, as well as more diagnoses of other psychiatric disorders. A total of 309 participants (54.7%) continued consultation for 2 years, and 207 (35.1%) continued for 5 years. Clustering analysis identified three, two, and three major clusters among pre-schoolers, school-aged children, and adolescents, respectively. The largest cluster was characterized by early termination of the consultation and accounted for 55.4, 70.6, and 73.4% of pre-schoolers, school-aged children, and adolescents, respectively. Among the school-aged children, the diagnosis of ADHD was associated with a cluster that required longer periods of consultations. Among the adolescents, comorbid psychiatric disorders other than intellectual disability and neurotic disorders were associated with clusters that required hospitalization. Conclusion: Continuous healthcare needs were common and psychiatric comorbidities were associated with complex trajectory among adolescents. The promotion of early intervention and prevention of comorbidities are important.
35126078|a|In this paper, we introduce a deep learning model to classify children as either healthy or potentially having autism with 94.6% accuracy using Deep Learning. Patients with autism struggle with social skills, repetitive behaviors, and communication, both verbal and non-verbal. Although the disease is considered to be genetic, the highest rates of accurate diagnosis occur when the child is tested on behavioral characteristics and facial features. Patients have a common pattern of distinct facial deformities, allowing researchers to analyze only an image of the child to determine if the child has the disease. While there are other techniques and models used for facial analysis and autism classification on their own, our proposal bridges these two ideas allowing classification in a cheaper, more efficient method. Our deep learning model uses MobileNet and two dense layers to perform feature extraction and image classification. The model is trained and tested using 3,014 images, evenly split between children with autism and children without it; 90% of the data is used for training and 10% is used for testing. Based on our accuracy, we propose that the diagnosis of autism can be done effectively using only a picture. Additionally, there may be other diseases that are similarly diagnosable.
35125555|a|Many parents experience grief and loss in response to their child receiving an autism diagnosis in early childhood. However, there is a dearth of research that considers if grief and loss are experienced by parents throughout their child's adolescence and young adulthood. Further, there is a small but growing body of evidence suggesting that parents of autistic children may be living with ambiguous loss in particular, that is, a loss for which there is no closure or resolution. This case study introduces a peer group intervention utilizing an ambiguous loss framework that school social workers and other clinicians can adopt to support mothers of autistic adolescents who are struggling with ambiguous loss. Through the group process, the mothers developed deeper understanding, self-compassion, and effective coping strategies, resulting in a more resilient approach to the transition process and an enhanced capacity to plan for a meaningful adult life with their autistic child.
35125469|a|OBJECTIVE: Individuals with developmental conditions, such as autism, experience stigma, which is reflected in derogatory language and labels. To limit stigma associated with disabilities, government agencies and medical organizations have adopted the use of person-centered language (PCL). This study investigated adherence to PCL guidelines among peer-reviewed research publications focused on autism. In addition, we investigated the co-occurrence of stigmatizing language in articles using person-first language (PFL) and identity-first language (IFL) styles. METHODS: We performed a systematic search of PubMed for autism-focused articles from January 2019 to May 2020. Articles from journals with more than 20 search returns were included, and a random sample of 700 publications were screened and examined for inclusion of prespecified, non-PCL terminology. RESULTS: Of the 315 publications, 156 (49.5%) were PCL compliant. Articles frequently used PCL and non-PCL terminology concomitantly, and 10% of publications included obsolete nomenclature. A logistic regression model showed the odds were more likely that publications using IFL were more likely to include other stigmatizing terminology than publications using PFL (odds ratio = 2.03, 95% confidence interval: 1.15-3.58). CONCLUSION: Within medical research, the language to describe individuals and populations needs to be used with intentionality and acknowledges that individuals are more than the diagnosis under study. This may reduce the structural stigma that may be implied otherwise. Our study showed that when PFL is used when addressing individuals with autism, other more stigmatizing language is often avoided and is in line with medical education and clinical practice.
35125466|a|OBJECTIVE: We investigated patterns and predictors of health service utilization (HSU) among children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and global developmental delays (GDD, non-ASD) attending tertiary services in a resource-constrained setting. METHOD: Caregivers and children (diagnosed with either ASD or GDD) attending the developmental service were enrolled into a retrospective cohort study. Sociodemographic factors, clinical factors, and service use over the preceding year were collected using structured questionnaires and medical record reviews. RESULTS: We enrolled 240 households (116 ASD, 124 GDD; ages 3-8 years; male:female ratio 2:1). The majority (84%) had moderate-to-severe symptoms, and 42% were nonverbal. Children with GDD had higher levels of underlying syndromic diagnoses than those with ASD (46, 37.1%; 14, 9.5%); (p < 0.01) and more co-occurring comorbidities (51, 41.0%; 14, 12.1%; p = 0.0001). Those with GDD had higher mean total HSU visits (13.3; 11.5; p = 0.02), higher mean specialist visits (4.0:2.0; p = 0.001), and more hospitalizations than those with ASD (38, 31%; 16, 14%; p = 0.02). Other services were similarly attended by both groups: therapy 6.0 (2.0-10.0), emergency visits 1.0 (1.0-2.0), auxiliary services 0 (0-1.0), and primary care visits 0 (0-1.0). Having an employed parent was the strongest predictor of increased HSU (p = 0.05). CONCLUSION: Despite high functional impairment in this cohort, many households underutilized therapy services. There was skewed attendance of emergency and specialist services over primary care services. Children with GDD had greater HSU compared with those with ASD, primarily because of more specialist visits. HSU could be improved by caregiver education, household economic empowerment, and strengthening of primary care services.
35125379|a|PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Although vitamin A deficiency (VAD) is rare in well resourced countries, there is a growing trend of VAD in at-risk pediatric populations. Early diagnosis is critically important to prevent its associated morbidity and mortality. This review highlights key lessons for evaluation, diagnosis, and management of children with xerophthalmia in the United States. It synthesizes the latest findings from the literature on the pathophysiology, epidemiology, risk factors, evaluation, and management of VAD in low-prevalence areas. RECENT FINDINGS: Vitamin A is crucial for maintaining the functional integrity of the eye, immune system, skin, and mucous membranes. Despite the scarcity of VAD in developed countries, there are increasing reports of VAD in at-risk children, including those with autism spectrum disorder and gastrointestinal conditions. There is a broad range of manifestations of VAD, posing a diagnostic challenge. Familiarity with the variable presentations of VAD and having a high index of suspicion in at-risk populations can aid in its early diagnosis. Systemic vitamin A supplementation and a multidisciplinary approach are important components of the management of VAD. SUMMARY: Even in well resourced countries, VAD should remain on the differential in patients with risk factors who present with relevant signs and symptoms. Early diagnosis and appropriate involvement of a multidisciplinary care team can help prevent morbidity and mortality associated with VAD.
35124780|a|Fetal androgen exposure may be associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We studied 1777 mother-child pairs in the prospective Odense Child Cohort. Prenatal androgen exposure was assessed by maternal 3rd trimester testosterone concentrations, maternal polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), and 3 months offspring anogenital distance. ASD traits were assessed at age 3 years with the ASD-symptom scale of the Child Behavior Checklist for ages 11/2-5 years. Maternal testosterone was positively associated with traits of ASD in boys (p < 0.05). Maternal PCOS was associated with increased offspring ASD traits (p = 0.046), but became non-significant after excluding parental psychiatric diagnosis. Offspring anogenital distance was not linked to ASD traits. Higher prevalence of ASD in boys could be linked to higher susceptibility to fetal androgen exposure.
35124401|a|The COVID-19 outbreak has profoundly affected adolescents' life. Adolescents with pre-existing psychiatric disorders have been at particular risk of increased mental health problems and problematic media use. 178 patients, aged 12-18 years, referred before the COVID-19 outbreak to child and adolescent psychiatry, participated in an anonymous online survey on the impact of the lockdown on media use and mental well-being. The survey was conducted approximately one month after the first easing of restrictions following a six-week lockdown in Switzerland. Based on self-report, half of the patients had been diagnosed with internalizing disorders (ID; depression or anxiety disorder) and the other half with other disorders (non-ID, e.g. ADHD, autistic spectrum disorder). Patients with ID reported higher emotional distress during the lockdown, and a larger number of patients with ID indicated a deterioration of pre-existing symptoms compared to non-ID patients. Although more patients with ID than with non-ID indicated spending a large amount of time on social media, social media time per day in hours was not significantly higher in ID. Patients with ID indicated a higher impact of media use on well-being and mood in everyday life during the lockdown. Social media time was higher in worsened than in improved non-ID patients, while the opposite was found in ID patients, indicating a possible protective effect of media use at least for some ID patients. The results confirm positive as well as negative associations between mental health, emotional well-being and media use for adolescents with ID during the lockdown.
35123407|a|BACKGROUND: Tbr1 encodes a T-box transcription factor and is considered a high confidence autism spectrum disorder (ASD) gene. Tbr1 is expressed in the postmitotic excitatory neurons of the deep neocortical layers 5 and 6. Postnatally and neonatally, Tbr1 conditional mutants (CKOs) have immature dendritic spines and reduced synaptic density. However, an understanding of Tbr1's function in the adult mouse brain remains elusive. METHODS: We used conditional mutagenesis to interrogate Tbr1's function in cortical layers 5 and 6 of the adult mouse cortex. RESULTS: Adult Tbr1 CKO mutants have dendritic spine and synaptic deficits as well as reduced frequency of mEPSCs and mIPSCs. LiCl, a WNT signaling agonist, robustly rescues the dendritic spine maturation, synaptic defects, and excitatory and inhibitory synaptic transmission deficits. CONCLUSIONS: LiCl treatment could be used as a therapeutic approach for some cases of ASD with deficits in synaptic transmission.
35123134|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder. There are no drugs to treat the core symptoms. De novo mutations often play an important role in ASD and multiple high-risk loci have been identified in the last decade. These mutations range from copy number variants to small insertion/deletion and single nucleotide variants. Large-scale exome sequencing has identified over 100 risk genes that are associated with ASD. Both etiological heterogeneity and unavailability of human neurons remain major hurdles in understanding the pathophysiology of ASD and testing of new drug candidates. Hence, the most achievable and relevant model to screen for potential drugs is human neurons from inducible pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), including those from individuals with genetic mutations. In this study, we tested stem cells from individuals carrying mutations in ADNP, FOXP1 or SHANK3. They were scaled and reprogrammed to glutamatergic neurons and assessed for the effects of their specific mutations on neurite outgrowth. High Content Analysis allowed us to observe phenotypic differences between ASD neurons compared to controls, in terms of neuron number, neurite number and average neurite length per neuron. Further, neurons were derived from both patient derived and genetically modified iPSCs with DDX3X mutation which were tested against 5088 drug like compounds. We assessed individual compound effects on the induced neurons to determine if they elicited changes that would indicate neurite growth (neuroprotection) or, alternatively, reduce outgrowth and hence appear neurotoxic. This report includes all methods, phenotypic outcomes, and results for the largest ASD small molecule screening effort done to date.
35122502|a|Voltage-gated calcium channel (VGCC) subunits have been genetically associated with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). The properties of the pore-forming VGCC subunit are modulated by auxiliary beta-subunits, which exist in four isoforms (CaVbeta1-4). Our previous findings suggested that activation of L-type VGCCs is a common feature of CaVbeta2 subunit mutations found in ASD patients. In the current study, we functionally characterized a novel CaVbeta1b variant (p.R296C) identified in an ASD patient. We used whole-cell and single-channel patch clamp to study the effect of CaVbeta1b_R296C on the function of L- and N-type VGCCs. Furthermore, we used co-immunoprecipitation followed by Western blot to evaluate the interaction of the CaVbeta1b-subunits with the RGK-protein Gem. Our data obtained at both, whole-cell and single-channel levels, show that compared to a wild-type CaVbeta1b, the CaVbeta1b_R296C variant inhibits L- and N-type VGCCs. Interaction with and modulation by the RGK-protein Gem seems to be intact. Our findings indicate functional effects of the CaVbeta1b_R296C variant differing from that attributed to CaVbeta2 variants found in ASD patients. Further studies have to detail the effects on different VGCC subtypes and on VGCC expression.
35122187|a|
35122186|a|Suicidal thoughts and behaviors (STB) and emergency department (ED) utilization are prevalent in autistic youth. The current study surveyed clinicians in a pediatric psychiatric ED to examine differences in attitudes on suicide-related care for autistic and non-autistic patient populations. While clinicians rated addressing STB in ASD as important and adaptations to care as necessary, less than half identified ASD as a suicide risk factor and confidence ratings were significantly lower for autistic patients. Previous ASD training predicted confidence and accounted for approximately 25% of the variance in confidence scores. Findings highlight the urgency to develop and disseminate ED clinician training, and address the lack of validated assessment tools, adapted suicide prevention practices, and evidence-based treatments for STB in autistic youth.
35121677|a|Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is considered best practice for treating anxiety in youth with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in clinic settings. However, there is significant need to translate CBT into school settings. This paper presents two case illustrations of students who participated in the Facing Your Fears: School-Based program (FYF-SB), a manualized, group CBT intervention for anxiety in ASD, adapted for delivery in schools by interdisciplinary school providers. Students showed improvement in anxiety across multiple domains following intervention, according to clinical interview and parent- and self-report. These outcomes suggest that anxious youth with ASD can benefit from CBT delivered by interdisciplinary school providers. Importantly, decreases in anxiety symptoms were evident in domains that were not explicitly targeted during intervention. Overall, these case illustrations help frame areas of future research, including examining how treatment gains may generalize across anxiety domains as well as whether corresponding improvement in school functioning occurs.
35121636|a|SIPA1L1 (also known as SPAR1) has been proposed to regulate synaptic functions that are important in maintaining normal neuronal activities, such as regulating spine growth and synaptic scaling, as a component of the PSD-95/NMDA-R-complex. However, its physiological role remains poorly understood. Here, we performed expression analyses using super-resolution microscopy in mouse brain and demonstrated that SIPA1L1 is mainly localized to general submembranous regions in neurons, but surprisingly, not to PSD. Our screening for physiological interactors of SIPA1L1 in mouse brain identified spinophilin and neurabin-1, regulators of GPCR signaling, but rejected PSD-95/NMDA-R-complex components. Furthermore, Sipa1l1 -/- mice showed normal spine size distribution and NMDA-R-dependent synaptic plasticity. Nevertheless, Sipa1l1 -/- mice showed aberrant responses to alpha2-adrenergic receptor (a spinophilin target) or adenosine A1 receptor (a neurabin-1 target) agonist stimulation, and striking behavioral anomalies, such as hyperactivity, enhanced anxiety, learning impairments, social interaction deficits, and enhanced epileptic seizure susceptibility. Male mice were used for all experiments. Our findings revealed unexpected properties of SIPA1L1, suggesting a possible association of SIPA1L1 deficiency with neuropsychiatric disorders related to dysregulated GPCR signaling, such as epilepsy, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism, or fragile X syndrome.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENTSIPA1L1 is thought to regulate essential synaptic functions as a component of the PSD-95/NMDA-R-complex. In our screening for physiological SIPA1L1-interactors, we identified GPCR-signaling regulators. Moreover, SIPA1L1 KO mice showed striking behavioral anomalies, which may be relevant to GPCR signaling. Our findings revealed an unexpected role of SIPA1L1, which may open new avenues for research on neuropsychiatric disorders that involve dysregulated GPCR signaling. Another important aspect of this paper is that we showed effective methods for checking PSD association and identifying native protein interactors that are difficult to solubilize. These results may serve as a caution for future claims about interacting proteins and PSD proteins, which could eventually save time and resources for researchers and avoid confusion in the field.
35121635|a|Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is caused by mutations in Tsc1 or Tsc2, whose gene products inhibit the small G-protein Rheb1. Rheb1 activates mTORC1, which may cause refractory epilepsy, intellectual disability and autism. The mTORC1 inhibitors have been used for TSC patients with intractable epilepsy. However, its effectiveness for cognitive symptoms remains unclear. We found a new signaling pathway for synapse formation through Rheb1 activation, but not mTORC1. Here, we show that treatment with the farnesyltransferase inhibitor lonafarnib increased unfarnesylated (inactive) Rheb1 levels and restored synaptic abnormalities in cultured Tsc2+/- neurons, whereas rapamycin did not enhance spine synapse formation. Lonafarnib treatment also restored the plasticity-related Arc expression in cultured Tsc2+/- neurons. Lonafarnib action was partly dependent on the Rheb1 reduction with syntenin. Oral administration of lonafarnib increased unfarnesylated protein levels without affecting mTORC1and MAP kinase signalings, and restored dendritic spine morphology in the hippocampi of male Tsc2+/- mice. In addition, lonafarnib treatment ameliorated contextual memory impairments and restored memory-related Arc expression in male Tsc2+/- mice in vivo Heterozygous Rheb1 knockout in male Tsc2+/- mice reproduced the results observed with pharmacological treatment. These results suggest that the Rheb1 activation may be responsible for synaptic abnormalities and memory impairments in Tsc2+/- mice, and its inhibition by lonafarnib could provide insight into potential treatment options for TSC-associated neuropsychiatric disorders (TANDs).SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENTTuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an autosomal dominant disease that causes neuropsychiatric symptoms, including intractable epilepsy, intellectual disability (ID) and autism. No pharmacological treatment for ID is reported so far. To develop a pharmacological treatment for ID, we investigated the mechanism of TSC and found Rheb1 activation is responsible for synaptic abnormalities in TSC neurons. To inhibit Rheb1 function, we used farnesyltransferase inhibitor lonafarnib, because farnesylation of Rheb1 is required for its activation. Lonafarnib treatment increased inactive Rheb1, and recovered proper synapse formation and plasticity-related Arc expression in TSC neurons. Furthermore, in vivo lonafarnib treatment restored contextual memory and Arc induction in TSC mice. Taken together, Rheb1 inhibition by lonafarnib could provide insight into potential treatments for TSC-associated ID.
35121586|a|BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Brain volumetrics have historically been obtained from MR imaging data. However, advances in CT, along with refined publicly available software packages, may support tissue-level segmentations of clinical CT images. Here, brain volumetrics obtained by applying two publicly available software packages to paired CT-MR data are compared. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In a group of patients (n = 69; 35 men) who underwent both MR imaging and CT brain scans within 12 months of one another, brain tissue was segmented into WM, GM, and CSF compartments using 2 publicly available software packages: Statistical Parametric Mapping and FMRIB Software Library. A subset of patients with repeat imaging sessions was used to assess the repeatability of each segmentation. Regression analysis and Bland-Altman limits of agreement were used to determine the level of agreement between segmented volumes. RESULTS: Regression analysis showed good agreement between volumes derived from MR images versus those from CT. The correlation coefficients between the 2 methods were 0.93 and 0.98 for Statistical Parametric Mapping and FMRIB Software Library, respectively. Differences between global volumes were significant (P < .05) for all volumes compared within a given segmentation pipeline. WM bias was 36% (SD, 38%) and 18% (SD, 18%) for Statistical Parametric Mapping and FMRIB Software Library, respectively, and 10% (SD, 30%) and 6% (SD, 20%) for GM (bias +- limits of agreement), with CT overestimating WM and underestimating GM compared with MR imaging. Repeatability was good for all segmentations, with coefficients of variation of <10% for all volumes. CONCLUSIONS: The repeatability of CT segmentations using publicly available software is good, with good correlation with MR imaging. With careful study design and acknowledgment of measurement biases, CT may be a viable alternative to MR imaging in certain settings.
35121384|a|Here we ask: What is productive signaling? How to define it, how to measure it, and most of all, what are the parameters that determine it? Further, what determines the strength of signaling from an upstream to a downstream node in a specific cell? These questions have either not been considered or not entirely resolved. The requirements for the signal to propagate downstream to activate (repress) transcription have not been considered either. Yet, the questions are pivotal to clarify, especially in diseases such as cancer where determination of signal propagation can point to cell proliferation and to emerging drug resistance, and to neurodevelopmental disorders, such as RASopathy, autism, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and cerebral palsy. Here we propose a framework for signal transduction from an upstream to a downstream node addressing these questions. Defining cellular processes, experimentally measuring them, and devising powerful computational AI-powered algorithms that exploit the measurements, are essential for quantitative science.
35120844|a|Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GAMT) deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder that results in reduced activity of guanidinoacetate methyltransferase, an accumulation of guanidinoacetate (GUAC), and a lack of cerebral creatine (CRE). Lack of CRE in the brain can cause intellectual disability, autistic-like behavior, seizures, and movement disorders. Identification at birth and immediate therapy can prevent intellectual disability and seizures. If started early in life, treatment with creatine supplements is highly effective. Because there are reliable biomarkers for GAMT deficiency, GUAC and CRE, and because the disorder is readily treatable with a significant improvement in outcomes, GAMT deficiency is an excellent candidate for newborn screening. Several programs have conducted pilot programs or started screening. An isobaric interferant of the GUAC marker has been reported which may cause false positive results. To reduce the number of false positives, a second-tier HPLC test to separate GUAC from unknown, isobaric interferants may be incorporated into the screening algorithm. New York State began screening for GAMT deficiency in October 2018 using a three-tiered screening approach. Quantification of GUAC and CRE were incorporated into routine screening for amino acids and acylcarnitines. In the first year of screening a total of 263,739 samples were tested for GAMT deficiency. Of these, 3382 required second tier testing. After second tier testing, 210 repeat specimens were requested for borderline results and 10 referrals were made to specialty care centers for confirmatory testing. In the first year of screening there were no confirmed cases of GAMT deficiency detected. To reduce the number of samples needing second tier testing and the number false positives we explored the use of a second MS transition to confirm the identity of the GUAC marker. GUAC and its internal standard are detected as butylated esters after sample preparation and derivatization. The original method used transition of the GUAC molecular ion of m/z 174.1 to a reactant ion of m/z 101.1. To confirm the identity of the GUAC marker we selected a qualifier ion of 174.1 > 73. The alternative product ion results were found to agree more closely with the second tier HPLC-MS/MS results for GUAC. It was found that the alternative transition may be used for quantification of the GUAC marker with acceptable analytical performance (linearity, accuracy, and precision). On March 5, 2020, the method of analysis for GUAC was modified to use the alternative product ion. For a comparable 6-month period, the modified method reduced the number of samples requiring second tier testing by 98%, reduced the number of borderline results requiring a repeat sample by 87.5%, and reduced the number of referrals to specialty care centers by 85%. Using the modified method, the correlation (r-squared) of the first and second tier screening results for GUAC is greater than 0.95. Since the first-tier results correlate well with the second-tier results, the second-tier screening is no longer necessary with the modified method.
35120753|a|Sleep disturbances are extremely common (40-86%) in children and adolescents, especially those with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and are often among the first symptoms identified by parents at a very early stage of their child's development. These abnormalities are among the main parental concerns when having a child with ASD and have a significant impact on the quality of life of patients, their parents, and more broadly their siblings. Sleep disorders are essentially abnormalities of the sleep-wake rhythm - primarily sleep onset insomnia or nocturnal awakenings (with difficulty falling back to sleep). These disturbances can be accompanied by other sleep disorders, requiring notably a systematic elimination of the presence of a sleep apnea or restless legs syndrome - to ensure a personalized and efficient therapeutic approach. Physiologically, the determinants of these sleep disorders are poorly understood, even though several studies point to a significant decrease in melatonin synthesis in people with ASD. Melatonin is a hormone that facilitates falling asleep and maintaining sleep and is also involved in the endogenous synchronization of internal biological clocks. However, the causal factors of this decrease in melatonin synthesis are largely unknown, involving to a small extent the genes involved in melatonin synthesis pathway. The treatment of sleep disorders is relatively systematic: after eliminating other specific sleep disorders associated with the complaint of insomnia, as well as other possible associated comorbidities (such as seizures), a global and graduated therapeutic approach must be put in place. This treatment will be non-pharmacological as a first line, then pharmacological as a second line. A number of non-pharmacological treatment strategies for sleep disorders in typically developing children and adolescents, as well as those with ASD, have been shown to be effective. This treatment requires a combination of: 1) parental education to promote sleep development; 2) setting up bedtime rituals adapted to the child's age and particularities; 3) specific behavioral strategies including bedtime fading, gradual extinction and positive reinforcement of adapted behaviors. It is very essential that the parents are accompanied throughout this therapy. Sleep hygiene and behavioral care must also take into consideration the important role of the zeitgebers of sleep-wake rhythms, i.e. the external environmental factors involved in the synchronization of the biological clocks: regular exposure to light at adapted times, regular meal and wake-up times, social activities and times for going to school. The evidence for the effectiveness of behavioral interventions in the treatment of behavioral insomnia in the typical developmental child is strong, since 94% of children show clinically significant improvements in nighttime sleepiness and waking. By contrast, only about 25% of children with ASD are improved by an approach combining sleep hygiene and behavioral therapy. Melatonin has a special and prominent place in the drug management of sleep disorders associated with ASD. Several clinical trials have shown that melatonin is effective in treating sleep disorders in patients with ASD. This work led to the European Medicines Agency (EMA) granting marketing authorization in September 2018 for a sustained-release paediatric melatonin molecule (Slenyto ). This synthetic molecule is a prolonged release melatonin (PRM) which mimics the physiological pharmacokinetic and secretory characteristics of endogenous melatonin, having a very short blood half-life and prolonged secretion for several hours during the night. A recent study evaluated the efficacy and safety of pediatric PRM (mini-tablets) in 125 children, aged 2 to 17.5 years with mainly ASD. After 15 days on placebo, the children were randomized into two parallel groups, PRM or placebo in a double-blind design for 13 weeks. At endpoint, total sleep time was increased by an average of 57.5 minutes on PRM and only 9.14 minutes on placebo (P=0.034). This difference between the two groups was already significant after three weeks of treatment (P=0.006). Sleep latency was also improved in the PRM group (-39.6 minutes) compared to placebo (-12.51 minutes) (P=0.01). Consolidated sleep duration (uninterrupted by awakenings) was improved by 77.9 minutes for the PRM group and only 25.4 minutes for the placebo group (P<0.001). PRM was well tolerated, the most frequent side effects being headache and daytime drowsiness at the same level with PRM or placebo. In addition, the acceptability by the children for swallowing the mini-tablets was excellent (100% compliance). The efficacy and tolerability of PRM was maintained over the medium and long term in the open phase, over a total study duration of 2 years.
35120709|a|The etiology of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) remains unknown, but gene-environment interactions, mediated through epigenetic mechanisms, are thought to be a key contributing factor. Prenatal environmental factors have been shown to be associated with both increased risk of ASD and altered histone deacetylases (HDACs) or acetylation levels. The relationship between epigenetic changes and gene expression in ASD suggests that alterations in histone acetylation, which lead to changes in gene transcription, may play a key role in ASD. Alterations in the acetylome have been demonstrated for several genes in ASD, including genes involved in synaptic function, neuronal excitability, and immune responses, which are mechanisms previously implicated in ASD. We review preclinical and clinical studies that investigated HDACs and autism-associated behaviors and discuss risk genes for ASD that code for proteins associated with HDACs. HDACs are also implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders with a known genetic etiology, such as 15q11-q13 duplication and Phelan-McDermid syndrome, which share clinical features and diagnostic comorbidities (e.g., epilepsy, anxiety, and intellectual disability) with ASD. Furthermore, we highlight factors that affect the behavioral phenotype of acetylome changes, including sensitive developmental periods and brain region specificity in the context of epigenetic programming.
35119604|a|Reduced eye contact early in life may play a role in the developmental pathways that culminate in a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. However, there are contradictory theories regarding the neural mechanisms involved. According to the amygdala theory of autism, reduced eye contact results from a hypoactive amygdala that fails to flag eyes as salient. However, the eye avoidance hypothesis proposes the opposite-that amygdala hyperactivity causes eye avoidance. This review evaluated studies that measured the relationship between eye gaze and activity in the 'social brain' when viewing facial stimuli. Of the reviewed studies, eight of eleven supported the eye avoidance hypothesis. These results suggest eye avoidance may be used to reduce amygdala-related hyperarousal among people on the autism spectrum.
35118804|a|Mutations affecting DLG2 are emerging as a genetic risk factor associated with neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders including schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorder, and bipolar disorder. Discs large homolog 2 (DLG2) is a member of the membrane-associated guanylate kinase protein superfamily of scaffold proteins, a component of the post-synaptic density in excitatory neurons and regulator of synaptic function and plasticity. It remains an important question whether and how haploinsuffiency of DLG2 contributes to impairments in basic behavioural and cognitive functions that may underlie symptomatic domains in patients that cross diagnostic boundaries. Using a heterozygous Dlg2 mouse model we examined the impact of reduced Dlg2 expression on functions commonly impaired in neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders including motor co-ordination and learning, pre-pulse inhibition and habituation to novel stimuli. The heterozygous Dlg2 mice exhibited behavioural impairments in long-term motor learning and long-term habituation to a novel context, but not motor co-ordination, initial responses to a novel context, PPI of acoustic startle or anxiety. We additionally showed evidence for the reduced regulation of the synaptic plasticity-associated protein cFos in the motor cortex during motor learning. The sensitivity of selective behavioural and cognitive functions, particularly those dependent on synaptic plasticity, to reduced expression of DLG2 give further credence for DLG2 playing a critical role in specific brain functions but also a mechanistic understanding of symptom expression shared across psychiatric disorders.
35116075|a|Background: Autistic people tend to report poorer Quality of Life (QOL) than comparison groups, though some studies do report more optimistic findings. Higher autistic traits are also related to poorer QOL. However, the role of alexithymia in this relationship has not been explored. Method: A total of 163 participants (N = 53 autistic and N = 111 comparison) consented to take part; however, 30 participants were excluded due to missing data (who did not differ from those who were retained on age, gender, education, employment, or living status), leaving a final sample of 133 (N = 42 Autistic and 91 Comparison participants). Demographic information (including age, gender) was collected, alongside self-report measures of autistic traits, mental health, alexithymia, and QOL. We estimated regression models based on pre-registered analysis, and we conducted exploratory network analyses. Results: Alexithymic traits did not predict QOL when controlling for covariates. Depression significantly predicted Physical, Psychological, and Social QOL. When examining the impact of just alexithymic traits and autistic traits, both were significantly associated with Physical and Psychological QOL. For participants with a low depression score, the correlation between alexithymia and QOL was strong; suggesting that depression occludes the association between alexithymia and QOL. Network analyses suggested that depression and anxiety exert direct effects on Physical and Psychological QOL, whereas alexithymia scores may influence Physical QOL via autistic traits. Conclusion: In sum, depression is a pervasive negative predictor of multiple QOL domains. The role of alexithymia in predicting QOL dimensionally and categorically was not ruled out, given our exploratory analyses, we suggest that interventions which target alexithymia may positively impact QOL for those who score low on depressive symptoms.
35115700|a|The ability to remember conspecifics is critical for adaptive cognitive functioning and social communication, and impairments of this ability are hallmarks of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). Although hippocampal ventral CA1 (vCA1) neurons are known to store social memories, how their activities are coordinated remains unclear. Here we show that vCA1 social memory neurons, characterized by enhanced activity in response to memorized individuals, were preferentially reactivated during sharp-wave ripples (SPW-Rs). Spike sequences of these social replays reflected the temporal orders of neuronal activities within theta cycles during social experiences. In ASD model Shank3 knockout mice, the proportion of social memory neurons was reduced, and neuronal ensemble spike sequences during SPW-Rs were disrupted, which correlated with impaired discriminatory social behavior. These results suggest that SPW-R-mediated sequential reactivation of neuronal ensembles is a canonical mechanism for coordinating hippocampus-dependent social memories and its disruption underlie the pathophysiology of social memory defects associated with ASD.
35115661|a|Copy number variants indicating loss of function in the DLG2 gene have been associated with markedly increased risk for schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorder, and intellectual disability. DLG2 encodes the postsynaptic scaffolding protein DLG2 (PSD93) that interacts with NMDA receptors, potassium channels, and cytoskeletal regulators but the net impact of these interactions on synaptic plasticity, likely underpinning cognitive impairments associated with these conditions, remains unclear. Here, hippocampal CA1 neuronal excitability and synaptic function were investigated in a novel clinically relevant heterozygous Dlg2+/- rat model using ex vivo patch-clamp electrophysiology, pharmacology, and computational modelling. Dlg2+/- rats had reduced supra-linear dendritic integration of synaptic inputs resulting in impaired associative long-term potentiation. This impairment was not caused by a change in synaptic input since NMDA receptor-mediated synaptic currents were, conversely, increased and AMPA receptor-mediated currents were unaffected. Instead, the impairment in associative long-term potentiation resulted from an increase in potassium channel function leading to a decrease in input resistance, which reduced supra-linear dendritic integration. Enhancement of dendritic excitability by blockade of potassium channels or activation of muscarinic M1 receptors with selective allosteric agonist 77-LH-28-1 reduced the threshold for dendritic integration and 77-LH-28-1 rescued the associative long-term potentiation impairment in the Dlg2+/- rats. These findings demonstrate a biological phenotype that can be reversed by compound classes used clinically, such as muscarinic M1 receptor agonists, and is therefore a potential target for therapeutic intervention.
35115485|a|Altered long-range connectivity is a common finding across neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders, but causes and consequences are not well understood. Genetic variation in ST8SIA2 has been associated with schizophrenia, autism, and bipolar disorder, and St8sia2-/- mice show a number of related neurodevelopmental and behavioral phenotypes. In the present study, we use conditional knockout (cKO) to dissect neurodevelopmental defects and behavioral consequences of St8sia2 deficiency in cortical interneurons, their cortical environment, or in the di- and mesencephalon. Neither separate nor combined cortical and diencephalic ablation of St8sia2 caused the disturbed thalamus-cortex connectivity observed in St8sia2-/- mice. However, cortical ablation reproduced hypoplasia of corpus callosum and fornix and mice with di- and mesencephalic ablation displayed smaller mammillary bodies with a prominent loss of parvalbumin-positive projection neurons and size reductions of the mammillothalamic tract. In addition, the mammillotegmental tract and the mammillary peduncle, forming the reciprocal connections between mammillary bodies and Gudden's tegmental nuclei, as well as the size of Gudden's ventral tegmental nucleus were affected. Only mice with these mammillary deficits displayed enhanced MK-801-induced locomotor activity, exacerbated impairment of prepulse inhibition in response to apomorphine, and hypoanxiety in the elevated plus maze. We therefore propose that compromised mammillary body connectivity, independent from hippocampal input, leads to these psychotic-like responses of St8sia2-deficient mice.
35115012|a|Adjustment for confounding sources of expression variation is an important preprocessing step in large gene expression studies, but the effect of confound adjustment on co-expression network analysis has not been well-characterized. Here, we demonstrate that the choice of confound adjustment method can have a considerable effect on the architecture of the resulting co-expression network. We compare standard and alternative confound adjustment methods and provide recommendations for their use in the construction of gene co-expression networks from bulk tissue RNA-seq datasets.
35114831|a|The oral microbiota has been implicated in various neurologic conditions, including autism spectrum disorder (ASD), a category of neurodevelopmental disorders defined by core behavioral impairments. Recent data propose the etiopathogenetic role of intestinal microbiota in ASD. The aim of the present study was to elucidate whether the oral microbiota contributes to the pathogenesis of ASD. On the basis of microbial changes detected in the oral cavity of children with ASD, we transferred oral microbiota from donors with ASD and typical development (TD) into an antibiotic-mediated microbiota-depleted mouse model and found that the ASD microbiota is sufficient to induce ASD-like behaviors, such as impaired social behavior. Mice receiving oral microbiota from the ASD donor showed significantly different microbiota structures in their oral cavity and intestinal tract as compared with those receiving TD microbiota and those not receiving any bacterium. The prefrontal cortex of ASD microbiota recipient mice displayed an alternative transcriptional profile with significant upregulation of serotonin-related gene expression, neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, and TGF-beta signaling pathway relative to that in TD microbiota recipient mice. The expression of serotonin-related genes was significantly increased in ASD microbiota recipient mice and was associated with selective autistic behaviors and changes in abundance of specific oral microbiota, including species of Bacteroidetes [G-7], Porphyromonas, and Tannerella. Machine learning based on the causal inference method confirmed a contributing role of Porphyromonas sp. HMT 930 in ASD. Taken together, the oral microbiota of children with ASD can lead to ASD-like behaviors, differences in microbial community structures, and altered neurosignaling activities in recipient mice; this highlights the mouth-microbial-brain connections in the development of neuropathology and provides a novel strategy to fully understand the etiologic mechanism of ASD.
35114205|a|The adhesion G protein-coupled receptor BAI1/ADGRB1 plays an important role in suppressing angiogenesis, mediating phagocytosis, and acting as a brain tumor suppressor. BAI1 is also a critical regulator of dendritic spine and excitatory synapse development and interacts with several autism-relevant proteins. However, little is known about the relationship between altered BAI1 function and clinically relevant phenotypes. Therefore, we studied the effect of reduced expression of full length Bai1 on behavior, seizure susceptibility, and brain morphology in Adgrb1 mutant mice. We compared homozygous (Adgrb1-/-), heterozygous (Adgrb1+/-), and wild-type (WT) littermates using a battery of tests to assess social behavior, anxiety, repetitive behavior, locomotor function, and seizure susceptibility. We found that Adgrb1-/- mice showed significant social behavior deficits and increased vulnerability to seizures. Adgrb1-/- mice also showed delayed growth and reduced brain weight. Furthermore, reduced neuron density and increased apoptosis during brain development were observed in the hippocampus of Adgrb1-/- mice, while levels of astrogliosis and microgliosis were comparable to WT littermates. These results show that reduced levels of full length Bai1 is associated with a broader range of clinically relevant phenotypes than previously reported.
35113965|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by impaired social communication and behavioral problems. An increased risk of premature mortality has been observed in individuals with ASD. Therefore, we hypothesized that biological aging is accelerated in individuals with ASD. Recently, several studies have established genome-wide DNA methylation (DNAm) profiles as 'epigenetic clocks' that can estimate biological aging. In addition, ASD has been associated with differential DNAm patterns. METHODS: We used two independent datasets from blood samples consisting of adult patients with high-functioning ASD and controls: the 1st cohort (38 ASD cases and 31 controls) and the 2nd cohort (6 ASD cases and 10 controls). We explored well-studied epigenetic clocks such as HorvathAge, HannumAge, SkinBloodAge, PhenoAge, GrimAge, and DNAm-based telomere length (DNAmTL). In addition, we investigated seven DNAm-based age-related plasma proteins, including plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), and smoking status, which are the components of GrimAge. RESULTS: Compared to controls, individuals with ASD in the 1st cohort, but not in the 2nd cohort, exhibited a trend for increased GrimAge acceleration and a significant increase of PAI-1 levels. A meta-analysis showed significantly increased PAI-1 levels in individuals with ASD compared to controls. CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest there is no epigenetic age acceleration in the blood of individuals with ASD. However, this study provides novel evidence regarding increased plasma PAI-1 levels in individuals with high-functioning ASD. These findings suggest PAI-1 may be a biomarker for high-functioning ASD, however, larger studies based on epigenetic clocks and PAI-1 will be necessary to confirm these findings.
35113904|a|Tentative results from feasibility analyses are critical for planning future randomized control trials (RCTs) in the emerging field of neural biomarkers of behavioral interventions. The current feasibility study used MRI-derived diffusion imaging data to investigate whether it would be possible to identify neural biomarkers of a behavioral intervention among people diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The corpus callosum has been linked to cognitive processing and callosal abnormalities have been previously found in people diagnosed with ASD. We used a case-control design to evaluate the association between the type of intervention people diagnosed with ASD had previously received and their current white matter integrity in the corpus callosum. Twenty-six children and adolescents with ASD, with and without a history of parent-managed behavioral intervention, underwent an MRI scan with a diffusion data acquisition sequence. We conducted tract-based spatial statistics and a region of interest analysis. The fractional anisotropy values (believed to indicate white matter integrity) in the posterior corpus callosum was significantly different across cases (exposed to parent-managed behavioral intervention) and controls (not exposed to parent-managed behavioral intervention). The effect was modulated by the intensity of the behavioral intervention according to a dose-response relationship. The current feasibility case-control study provides the basis for estimating the statistical power required for future RCTs in this field. In addition, the study demonstrated the effectiveness of purposely-developed motion control protocols and helped to identify regions of interest candidates. Potential clinical applications of diffusion tensor imaging in the evaluation of treatment outcomes in ASD are discussed.
35113328|a|The COVID-19 pandemic (2020) resulted in school closures and changes to school delivery. The aim of this study was to explore how these changes impacted on children on the autism spectrum. As part of an online survey, parents (n = 180) of school-aged children (9.3-16.5 years) on the autism spectrum in Australia were asked an open-ended question on how the COVID-19 pandemic had impacted on their child's education experience. Nearly half (48%) of the parents reported only negative impacts, 26% only positive impacts, 12% a mix of positive and negative impacts, and 9% little or no impact. Parents identified that school restrictions impacted on more than their child's learning. These findings highlight areas to consider when supporting autism-friendly learning.
35113327|a|Research evaluating predictors of mathematics ability in preschoolers with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is scarce and inconclusive. The present study first compared the mathematics ability and cognitive abilities of preschoolers with ASD and age-matched typically developing (TD) peers. Then, we examined the relative contributions of cognitive abilities to the mathematics ability of preschoolers with ASD and TD. The results show that compared to those of their age-matched TD peers, the mathematics and cognitive abilities of preschoolers with ASD were impaired. The predictors of mathematics ability were found to differ among preschoolers with ASD and their age-matched TD peers. For TD preschoolers, the domain-specific approximate number system (ANS) was the key predictor of mathematics ability. For preschoolers with ASD, domain-general working memory (WM) was most important.
35112511|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has been repeatedly associated with enlargements of head circumference in children with ASD. However, it is unclear if these enlargements persist into adulthood. This is the first study to investigate head circumference in a large sample of adults with ASD. METHODS: We apply a fully automated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) based measurement approach to compute head circumference by combining 3D and 2D image processing. Head circumference was compared between male adults with ASD (n = 120) and healthy male controls (n = 136), from the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE) database. To explain which brain alterations drive our results, secondary analyses were performed for 10 additional morphological brain metrics. RESULTS: ASD subjects showed an increase in head circumference (p = .0018). In addition, ASD patients had increased ventricular surface area (SA) (p = .0013). Intracranial volume, subarachnoidal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) volume, and gray matter volume explained 50% of head circumference variance. Using a linear support vector machine, we gained an ASD classification accuracy of 73% (sensitivity 92%, specificity 68%) using head circumference and brain-morphological metrics as input features. Head circumference, ventricular SA, ventricular CSF volume, and ventricular asymmetry index contributed to 85% of feature weighting relevant for classification. CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that head circumference increases in males with ASD persist into adulthood. Results may be driven by morphological alterations of ventricular CSF. The presented approach for an automated head circumference measurement allows for the retrospective investigation of large MRI datasets in neuropsychiatric disorders.
35112480|a|Reports on the association between the prevalence of atopic diseases and neurodevelopmental disabilities (NDs) have been inconsistent in the literature. We investigated whether autism spectrum disorder (ASD), attention deficit-hyperactivity disorders (ADHD), and other NDs are more prevalent in children with asthma, atopic dermatitis (AD) and allergic rhinitis (AR) compared to those without specific atopic conditions. A total of 2580 children enrolled at birth were followed prospectively, of which 119 have ASD, 423 have ADHD, 765 have other NDs, and 1273 have no NDs. Atopic diseases and NDs were defined based on physician diagnoses in electronic medical records. Logistic regressions adjusting for maternal and child characteristics estimated the associations between NDs (i.e., ASD, ADHD, and other NDs) and asthma, AD and AR, respectively. Children with asthma, AD or AR had a greater likelihood of having ADHD or other NDs compared with children without specific atopic conditions. The association between ASD and asthma diminished after adjusting for maternal and child factors. Either mothers or children having atopic conditions and both mothers and children with atopic conditions were associated with a higher prevalence of ADHD in children, compared with neither mothers nor children having atopic conditions. Children diagnosed with multiple atopic diseases were more likely to have NDs compared with those without or with only one type of atopic disease. In conclusion, in this U.S. urban birth cohort, children with atopic diseases had a higher co-morbidity of NDs. The findings have implications for etiologic research that searches for common early life antecedents of NDs and atopic conditions. Findings from this study also should raise awareness among health care providers and parents about the possible co-occurrence of both NDs and atopic conditions, which calls for coordinated efforts to screen, prevent and manage NDs and atopic conditions.
35112345|a|AIM: To assess the extent of the scientific literature on avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID) in children and young people with autism in order to evaluate and synthesize the evidence on (a) the nature of feeding and eating difficulties in children and young people with autism; (b) the consequences of a severely restricted diet; and (c) what is known about effective treatment approaches. METHOD: PubMed and PsycInfo databases were searched, identifying 56 studies and a narrative synthesis was effected. RESULTS: The literature suggested that ARFID-like presentations are common in children and young people with autism, with severe consequences for physical and mental health. The three drivers mentioned in the DSM-5 criteria, namely a sensory-based avoidance, fear- or phobia-based restriction, and a lack of interest in eating, are present in this population, although sensory sensitivities are currently the most commonly described. Research suggests that ARFID symptoms in children and young people with autism can be amenable to treatment, with evidence that behavioural interventions are feasible and potentially effective in this population. INTERPRETATION: ARFID is a common and impactful problem among young people with autism but is currently under researched. Work is required to (a) identify the prevalence of ARFID in children and young people with autism; (b) uncover the key drivers of ARFID in this population; (c) adapt currently available interventions for use with children and young people with autism; and (d) rigorously test these interventions in clinical trials.
35110990|a|One of the most universally accepted facts about autism is that it is heterogenous. Individuals diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder have a wide range of behavioral presentations and a variety of co-occurring medical and mental health conditions. The identification of more homogenous subgroups is likely to lead to a better understanding of etiologies as well as more targeted interventions and treatments. In 2006, we initiated the UC Davis MIND Institute Autism Phenome Project (APP) with the overarching goal of identifying clinically meaningful subtypes of autism. This ongoing longitudinal multidisciplinary study now includes over 400 children and involves comprehensive medical, behavioral, and neuroimaging assessments from early childhood through adolescence (2-19 years of age). We have employed several strategies to identify sub-populations within autistic individuals: subgrouping by neural, biological, behavioral or clinical characteristics as well as by developmental trajectories. In this Mini Review, we summarize findings to date from the APP cohort and describe progress made toward identifying meaningful subgroups of autism.
35110736|a|Genetic risk for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is associated with hundreds of genes spanning a wide range of biological functions1-6. The alterations in the human brain resulting from mutations in these genes remain unclear. Furthermore, their phenotypic manifestation varies across individuals7,8. Here we used organoid models of the human cerebral cortex to identify cell-type-specific developmental abnormalities that result from haploinsufficiency in three ASD risk genes-SUV420H1 (also known as KMT5B), ARID1B and CHD8-in multiple cell lines from different donors, using single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) analysis of more than 745,000 cells and proteomic analysis of individual organoids, to identify phenotypic convergence. Each of the three mutations confers asynchronous development of two main cortical neuronal lineages-gamma-aminobutyric-acid-releasing (GABAergic) neurons and deep-layer excitatory projection neurons-but acts through largely distinct molecular pathways. Although these phenotypes are consistent across cell lines, their expressivity is influenced by the individual genomic context, in a manner that is dependent on both the risk gene and the developmental defect. Calcium imaging in intact organoids shows that these early-stage developmental changes are followed by abnormal circuit activity. This research uncovers cell-type-specific neurodevelopmental abnormalities that are shared across ASD risk genes and are finely modulated by human genomic context, finding convergence in the neurobiological basis of how different risk genes contribute to ASD pathology.
35110066|a|
35109924|a|BACKGROUND: Children and youth with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) may manifest self-injurious behaviors (SIB) that may become severe and refractory with limited pharmacologic or behavioral treatment options. Here, we present the protocol of a prospective, mixed-methods study to assess the safety and efficacy of deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the nucleus accumbens (NAcc) for children and youth with ASD and severe, refractory SIB. METHODS: This is a prospective, single-center, single-cohort, open-label, non-randomized pilot trial of 6 patients. Participants will be recruited through specialized behavioral clinics with persistent severe and refractory SIB following standard and intensive interventions. Following NAcc-DBS, participants will be enrolled in the study for 12 months. The primary objectives of the study are safety and feasibility, assessed by rate of recruitment and identification of factors impacting adherence to follow-up and study protocol. Potential treatment efficacy will be assessed by changes in the Children's Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale in ASD (CYBOCS-ASD), the Behavior Problems Index (BPI), the Inventory of Statements about Self-Injury (ISAS) and the Repetitive Behavior Scale-Revised (RBS-R) questionnaires. Additional clinical outcomes will be assessed, including measures of participant and caregiver quality of life, actigraph measurements, and positron emission tomography (PET) changes following DBS. DISCUSSION: This study will be the first to evaluate the effect of DBS of the NAcc on a pediatric population in a controlled, prospective trial. Secondary outcomes will improve the understanding of behavioral, neuro-imaging, and electrophysiologic changes in children with ASD and SIB treated with DBS. This trial will provide an estimated effect size of NAcc-DBS for severe refractory SIB in children with ASD in preparation for future comparative trials. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Registration on ClinicalTrials.gov was completed on 12 June 2019 with the Identifier: NCT03982888 .
35109795|a|BACKGROUND: Encephalopathy following Ifosfamide treatment is a well-described phenomenon that is typically treated with Methylene Blue (MB). Chloroacetaldehyde, a potentially neurotoxic metabolite of Ifosfamide is hypothesized to cause this encephalopathy. Current guidelines for treatment is to stop Ifosfamide and provide supportive care. MB acts to inhibit Chloroacetaldehyde formation and has been described as a therapy and prophylaxis for Ifosfamide-encephalopathy. MB is effective within 30 min and lasts up to 3 days. Prolonged encephalopathy and MB therapy has not been described in the literature as lasting longer than 30 days following treatment. CASE PRESENTATION: We present the case of an 11-year-old female with autistic spectrum disorder and recurrent episodes of severe somnolence for 7 months following Ifosfamide therapy for her Non-Germinomatous Germ Cell Tumor (GCT). Periods of somnolence occurred prior to receiving cranial RT. Administration of MB gave immediate but limited response, with resolution of somnolence lasting 1-2 days between administrations. The somnolence could not be explained by neuroimaging or laboratory evaluation, but EEG indicated persistent encephalopathy. CONCLUSION: A literature review determines that neurotoxicity is a side effect of Ifosfamide, but this effect has not been described persisting longer than 30 days. Our case continued to require treatment with MB for 7 months following cessation of therapy. We report these novel clinical findings, and hypothesize that there could be a genetic/metabolic component linking this reaction to Ifosfamide with the case patient's pre-existing autism. This possible association may also correlate to the already-established link between autism and the development of GCTs. This hypothesis leads to further discussion on the suitable usage of Ifosfamide in children with co-morbidities and the necessity of screening prior to its usage.
35109718|a|D-cycloserine (DCS) is an anti-tuberculosis medication that has been utilized for years for drug-resistant tuberculosis. DCS works via a centrally acting mechanism which can cause neurotoxic adverse effects which has limited its use. This centrally acting mechanism also allows for DCS to be utilized for various neuropsychiatric purposes. Our patient was on high-dose DCS for autism spectrum disorder and presented to the emergency department (ED) with a seizure. The seizure episode was managed with both anti-epileptics and pyridoxine. With increasing novel use of this older medication, it is imperative for ED clinicians to be aware of the different management strategies that may be required when a patient presents with a neurotoxic effect, specifically seizures, secondary to DCS.
35109700|a|LAY ABSTRACT: In this study, we aim to explore the ability of autistic children to process emotions and respond to a range of feelings in relation to a triad of difficulties known as alexithymia, namely children's difficulties to recognize, describe, and distinguish emotions. Alexithymia is common in autistic adults but we know very little about children. To understand this condition better, within a large group of studies, first we study the extent to which alexithymia difficulties are present in autistic children. In reviewing the literature, we also present the assessment measures implemented in each study, their limitations, and potential effects on our understanding of findings. This knowledge will help us understand the extent to which alexithymia is present in autistic children and how it may be related to their emotional difficulties. Also, it will allow us to further detect challenges early on in children's lives so that we recommend interventions that teach autistic children how to recognize, describe, and distinguish emotions in themselves and in others. Such interventions may include family members of autistic children to assist interactions with their child. Supporting children from an early age will help them develop skills that will ready them for school and life and it will enhance their ability to build supportive relationships and meet their fullest potential.
35107047|a|Childhood gender variance (GV) is associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) diagnosis/traits; however, this association has mainly been investigated in clinical samples. An ASD screening measure based on 10 items from the commonly used Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL) might enable investigation of this association in a wider variety of (non-clinical) populations where the CBCL and a measure of GV are available. We investigated whether GV in 6- to 12-year-olds (N = 1719; 48.8% assigned male at birth) from a community sample showed an association with the CBCL 10-item ASD screener. The Gender Identity Questionnaire for Children measured GV. The CBCL 10-item ASD screener measured ASD traits. The remaining CBCL items provided a measure of children's general emotional and behavioral challenges. Higher GV was associated with higher CBCL ASD screener scores, including when controlling for the remaining CBCL items. The CBCL 10-item ASD screener can be useful for investigating the link between GV and ASD traits in 6- to 12-year-olds. Given that the CBCL is commonly employed, secondary analyses of existing datasets that also included a measure of GV could enable investigation of how widely the association between GV and ASD applies across a variety of populations.
35106542|a|The contactin-associated protein-like 2 gene, CNTNAP2, is a highly penetrant risk gene thought to play a role in the genetic etiology of language-related disorders, such as autism spectrum disorder and developmental language disorder. Despite its candidacy for influencing language development, few preclinical studies have examined the role of CNTNAP2 in auditory processing. Using in vivo and in vitro electrophysiological recordings in a rat model with translational validity, we report that a loss of the Cntnap2 gene function caused immature-like cortical evoked potentials, delayed multiunit response latencies to acoustic stimuli, impaired temporal processing, and led to a pattern of hyperexcitability in both multiunit and single cell recordings in adulthood. These collective results provide direct evidence that a constitutive loss of Cntnap2 gene function in rats can cause auditory processing impairments similar to those seen in language-related human disorders, indicating that its contribution in maintaining cortical neuron excitability may underlie the cortical activity alterations observed in Cntnap2-/- rats.
35106514|a|Alterations in the gut microbiome have been associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), but whether they are a cause, effect, or confounder remains unclear. In a recent issue of Cell, Yap and colleagues report that ASD-associated microbiota changes are likely a consequence of low diet diversity.1.
35106187|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder with wide spectrum of symptoms and few effective therapies. Evidence is suggestive of an association between immune system dysfunction and autism spectrum disorders (ASD) among children with ASD. Immunoglobulins (Ig) are found to be increased in the circulation of individuals with autism. The prospective study was aimed to estimate and correlate the levels of IgG4 in blood and saliva of children with autism. METHODOLOGY: Blood and unstimulated saliva were collected from 172 children (55 ASD, 57 healthy control, and 60 suspected parasitic infection) aged 0-18 years. Routine blood investigations were done. Serum and salivary IgG4 levels were analyzed using a commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit. Data were subjected to statistical analysis. RESULTS: ELISA tests showed that the IgG4 levels in serum and saliva were significantly increased (P<0.05) in children with ASD as compared to normal control children. Both serum and saliva IgG4 levels showed a significant positive correlation (P<0.05). CONCLUSION: IgG4 can be used as a potential biomarker for the early detection of ASD. Further, saliva can be a diagnostic, noninvasive assessment tool for health monitoring of children with autism. Lay summary: The collection of saliva is easy and painless compared to other sample collection methods. The present study shows that, among children with autism, brain-reactive antibody, immunoglobulin G4 (gG4), is increased both in blood and saliva, and there is a significant correlation between the two levels. Therefore, the study recommends IgG4 as a potential biomarker for the early detection of autism, and saliva can be helpful in diagnosis and health monitoring of children with ASD.
35105862|a|In advancing age, some individuals maintain a stable cognitive performance over time, while others experience a rapid decline. Such variation in cognitive trajectory is only partially explained by common neurodegenerative pathologies. Hence, we aimed to identify new molecular processes underlying variation in cognitive trajectory using brain microRNA profile followed by an integrative analysis with brain transcriptome and proteome. Individual cognitive trajectories were derived from longitudinally assessed cognitive-test scores of older-adult brain donors from four longitudinal cohorts. Postmortem brain microRNA profiles, transcriptomes, and proteomes were derived from the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. The global microRNA association study of cognitive trajectory was performed in a discovery (n = 454) and replication cohort (n = 134), followed by a meta-analysis that identified 6 microRNAs. Among these, miR-132-3p and miR-29a-3p were most significantly associated with cognitive trajectory. They explain 18.2% and 2.0% of the variance of cognitive trajectory, respectively, and act independently of the eight measured neurodegenerative pathologies. Furthermore, integrative transcriptomic and proteomic analyses revealed that miR-132-3p was significantly associated with 24 of the 47 modules of co-expressed genes of the transcriptome, miR-29a-3p with 3 modules, and identified 84 and 214 downstream targets of miR-132-3p and miR-29a-3p, respectively, in cognitive trajectory. This is the first global microRNA study of cognitive trajectory to our knowledge. We identified miR-29a-3p and miR-132-3p as novel and robust contributors to cognitive trajectory independently of the eight known cerebral pathologies. Our findings lay a foundation for future studies investigating mechanisms and developing interventions to enhance cognitive stability in advanced age.
35105663|a|Cobalamin C disease is the most common complementation class of Cobalamin disorders. Here, we present a case of a 14-year-old male with early-onset cblC disease and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) admitted to our inpatient medical service for behavioral decompensation. We use this case to highlight key aspects of the neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders associated with cblC disease. By incorporating a comprehensive review of existing literature, we highlight salient domains of psychological impairment in cblC disease, discuss the full range of neuropsychiatric presentations, and review clinical management implications unique to cblC disease.
35105621|a|INTRODUCTION: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complicated diffuse developmental disorder that commonly involves gastrointestinal distress and dysbacteriosis. Emerging lines of evidence have shown faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) to be a potential therapeutic strategy for improving the clinical outcomes of patients with ASD by re-establishing their intestinal microflora. We are undertaking the first-ever multicentre, double-blind, randomised controlled trial of FMT for the treatment of children with both ASD and gastrointestinal symptoms and will assess the feasibility and efficacy outcomes of this strategy. METHODS: In total, 318 children with both ASD and gastrointestinal symptoms will be enrolled (from 15 hospitals in China) to receive either FMT intervention (n=212) or a placebo (control, n=106). Children aged 3-6 years will take two capsules two times a day, and those older than 6 years will take three capsules two times a day. Each patient will receive four treatment courses, with each 12-day course being repeated every month. Outcomes will be evaluated at baseline, throughout the period of intervention, and at subsequent follow-ups for 2 months. The primary trial objective is to investigate the remodelling effect of FMT on the intestinal microflora in patients with ASD. The secondary objective focuses on the clinical efficacy and safety of FMT, including its improvement of the clinical response and metabonomics. ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Ethical approval was obtained from the hospital Ethics Committee of each Faecal Transfer for ASD China Multicenter Trial Working Group. The ongoing FMT clinical trial is intended to support the approval of the new technology and its administration. The results of this trial will provide high-quality evidence to inform the future clinical application of this new therapy. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ChiCTR2100043906; Pre-results.
35105414|a|
35105391|a|BACKGROUND: Retrospective self-reports of childhood trauma are associated with a greater risk of psychopathology in adulthood than prospective measures of trauma. Heritable reporter characteristics are anticipated to account for part of this association, whereby genetic predisposition to certain traits influences both the likelihood of self-reporting trauma and of developing psychopathology. However, previous research has not considered how gene-environment correlation influences these associations. AIMS: To investigate reporter characteristics associated with retrospective self-reports of childhood trauma and whether these associations are accounted for by gene-environment correlation. METHOD: In 3963 unrelated individuals from the Twins Early Development Study, we tested whether polygenic scores for 21 psychiatric, cognitive, anthropometric and personality traits were associated with retrospectively self-reported childhood emotional and physical abuse. To assess the presence of gene-environment correlation, we investigated whether these associations remained after controlling for composite scores of environmental adversity across development. RESULTS: Retrospectively self-reported childhood trauma was associated with polygenic scores for autism spectrum disorder (ASD), body mass index (BMI), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and risky behaviours. When composite scores of environmental adversity were controlled for, only associations with the polygenic scores for ASD and PTSD remained significant. CONCLUSIONS: Genetic predisposition to ASD and PTSD may increase liability to experiencing or interpreting events as traumatic. Associations between genetic predisposition for risky behaviour and BMI with self-reported childhood trauma may reflect gene-environment correlation. Studies of the association between retrospectively self-reported childhood trauma and later-life outcomes should consider that genetically influenced reporter characteristics may confound associations, both directly and through gene-environment correlation.
35105233|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Autistic people can have difficulties during pregnancy and after giving birth, such as difficulty getting health care that meets their needs. Autistic people may therefore have lower well-being than non-autistic people during this time. We asked autistic and non-autistic people to fill in questionnaires measuring stress, depression, anxiety and satisfaction with life. They were asked to do this once during pregnancy, once 2 to 3 months after giving birth and once 6 months after giving birth. At 6 months after giving birth, they also filled in questionnaires about parenting. The autistic parents had higher stress, depression and anxiety scores than the non-autistic parents. For both groups, scores for anxiety went down over time. There were no differences between the groups on satisfaction with their life or how confident they were as a parent. There were no differences between the groups on most areas of parenting style, although autistic parents scored lower on parenting discipline. This study suggests that autistic people may be more stressed, depressed and anxious than non-autistic people during pregnancy and after giving birth. Autistic people therefore need good quality support during this time. This study also suggests that autistic and non-autistic parents may be just as likely to parent in positive ways such as being sensitive to their baby's needs.
35105226|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Children with autism experience high rates of co-occurring mental health conditions like challenging behaviors and anxiety. However, these co-occurring mental health needs are often not identified when they first become problematic. Pediatricians and their care staff are in a good position to identify mental health needs early and support families to connect to needed services. This study describes a project focused on mental health screening for children with autism in pediatric primary care clinics. Over half of eligible patients were screened using the Pediatric Symptom Checklist-17. Many children with autism had clinically elevated scores, suggesting the need for mental health assessment or services. In particular, children with positive screens had clinical elevations on the challenging behavior and attention subscales of the Pediatric Symptom Checklist-17. This finding is consistent with typical trends in co-occurring challenging behavior presentations in children with autism. Mental health screening in primary care is feasible and offers a promising opportunity to identify co-occurring mental health needs for children with autism early. Screening rates varied between clinics, suggesting tailored to improve routine screening in pediatric primary care for children with autism.
35105205|a|CONTEXT: Sleep is critical for optimal childhood metabolic health and neurodevelopment. However, there is limited knowledge regarding childhood sex differences in sleep, including children with neurodevelopmental disorders, and the impact of such differences on metabolic health. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate if sex differences in childhood sleep exist and if sleep associates with metabolic health outcomes equally by sex. Using autism spectrum disorder (ASD) as a case study, we also examine sleep sex differences in children with a neurodevelopmental disorder. METHODS: A narrative review explored the literature focussing on sex differences in childhood sleep. RESULTS: Sex differences in sleep were not detected among pre-adolescents. However, female adolescents were more likely to report impaired sleep than males. Childhood obesity is more common in males. Shorter sleep duration may be associated with obesity in male pre-adolescents/adolescents; although findings are mixed. ASD is male-predominant; yet, there was an indication that pre-adolescent female children with ASD had more impaired sleep. CONCLUSION: Sex differences in sleep appear to emerge in adolescence with more impaired sleep in females. This trend was also observed among pre-adolescent female children with ASD. Further research is needed on sex differences in childhood sleep and metabolic health and the underlying mechanisms driving these differences.
35104420|a|
35103899|a|This study examined clinician insights into telehealth assessment services for autism spectrum disorder implemented during the COVID-19 pandemic. 35 clinicians from multiple disciplines across 17 sites in the Autism Care Network were interviewed. Themes identified through qualitative analyses included factors related to confidence in diagnosis (impressions of in-home observation; child and family factors that affected diagnostic confidence; changes in rapport); patient and family factors related to telehealth (perceived family benefits of and barriers to telehealth; factors related to healthcare disparities; factors specific to non-native English speakers); and institutional and workplace factors related to transitioning to telehealth (institutional support; changes to efficacy, attendance, and work satisfaction). Results suggest that telehealth has potential to be an effective tool in autism assessment practice.
35103402|a|Autism may be underdiagnosed in females because their social difficulties are often less noticeable. This study explored sex differences in automatic facial emotion processing in 45 adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (22 female, 23 male), age 10-16 years, performing active target detection task and Go/NoGo tasks where faces with positive and negative emotional expressions served as irrelevant distractors. The combined sample demonstrated more accurate performance on the target detection (response initiation) than the Go/NoGo task (response inhibition), replicating findings previously reported in typical participants. Females exhibited greater difficulty than males with response initiation in the target detection task, especially in the context of angry faces, while males found withholding a response in the Go/NoGo block with happy faces more challenging. Electrophysiological data revealed no sex differences or emotion discrimination effects during the early perceptual processing of faces indexed by the occipitotemporal N170. Autistic males demonstrated increased frontal N2 and parietal P3 amplitudes compared to females, suggesting greater neural resource allocation to automatic emotion regulation processes. The associations between standardized behavioral measures (autism severity, theory of mind skills) and brain responses also varied by sex: more adaptive social functioning was related to the speed of perceptual processing (N170 latency) in females and the extent of deliberate attention allocation (P3 amplitudes) in males. Together, these findings suggest that males and females with autism may rely on different strategies for social functioning and highlight the importance of considering sex differences in autism. LAY SUMMARY: Females with autism may exhibit less noticeable social difficulties than males. This study demonstrates that autistic females are more successful than males at inhibiting behavioral responses in emotional contexts, while males are more likely to initiate a response. At the neural level, social functioning in females is related to the speed of automatic perceptual processing of facial cues, and in males, to the extent of active attention allocation to the stimuli. These findings highlight the importance of considering sex differences in autism diagnosis and treatment selection.
35103171|a|Forkhead box protein 1 (FOXP1) (OMIM: 605515) is located at chromosomal region 3p14.1, which codes for a transcriptional repressor protein. FOXP1 syndrome (FOXP1S) (OMIM #613670) is caused by FOXP1 gene deletions and mutations (nonsense, missense, and in-frame deletions). It is identified by the presence of intellectual disability with language impairment, with or without autistic features. This paper describes the case of a seven-year-old girl mainly presenting with autism spectrum disorder, language impairment, and intellectual disability. In addition, she also exhibited signs of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Whole-exome sequencing showed that she had a mutation in the FOXP1 gene; the variant revealed was FOXP1: NM_001244813 with a deleted segment (1152-1164) of exon 11. Subsequently, she was diagnosed with FOXP1 syndrome. In order to manage behavioral disturbance, risperidone was given, and she showed marked improvement. In this article, we report the characteristic features of attention deficits hyperactivity in addition to previously reported autism spectrum disorder with language impairment accompanied by intellectual disability caused by FOXP1 exon deletion. This study aims to provide a systematic, comprehensive presentation of a patient with a FOXP1 mutation to contribute to the existing literature on this subject.
35103038|a|This descriptive phenomenological study examines career adaptability of parents of children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Participants include 30 parents (18 fathers and 12 mothers; 6 of them were couples) ranging in age from 26 to 45 years, selected by a purposive sampling method. The semi-structured interview form developed by the researchers based on the Career Construction Theory was used to collect data after receiving expert verification on the questions. In addition, to triangulate data sources, the Participant Feedback Form filled by the participants on the day following the interview and the Researcher Diary filled by the interviewer during the data collection process were utilized. Colaizzi's seven-step method was followed to analyze the data. Four major domains emerged, highlighting traumas/changes in work-life after ASD, career adaptability, influences of COVID-19 pandemic, and post-interview awareness of this particular sample. Results from the study highlighted looking ahead, being persistent, career decision-making, career-exploration accompanied by some expectations such as more time, income and flexibility, and coping skills build upon the ASD, along with postponement and abandonment of previous career goals, alteration of future career plans, and lack of self-exploration. The results contributed to the theory by providing evidence for career adaptability of parents of children with individual differences, including career adaptability resources and needs. Findings also implied the need for interventions to foster career adaptability skills of parents regarding looking ahead in a positive way, decision-making, self-exploration, and coping with career barriers and difficulties.
35102227|a|The numerous multistable phenomena in vision, hearing and touch attest that the inner workings of perception are prone to instability. We investigated a visual example-binocular rivalry-with an accurate no-report paradigm, and uncovered developmental and maturational lifespan trajectories that were specific for age and sex. To interpret these trajectories, we hypothesized that conflicting objectives of visual perception-such as stability of appearance, sensitivity to visual detail, and exploration of fundamental alternatives-change in relative importance over the lifespan. Computational modelling of our empirical results allowed us to estimate this putative development of stability, sensitivity, and exploration over the lifespan. Our results confirmed prior findings of developmental psychology and appear to quantify important aspects of neurocognitive phenotype. Additionally, we report atypical function of binocular rivalry in autism spectrum disorder and borderline personality disorder. Our computational approach offers new ways of quantifying neurocognitive phenotypes both in development and in dysfunction.
35101965|a|Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) is a major negative regulator of the PI3K/Akt/mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway. Loss-of-function mutations in PTEN have been found in a subset of patients with macrocephaly and autism spectrum disorder. PTEN loss in neurons leads to somal hypertrophy, aberrant migration, dendritic overgrowth, increased spine density, and hyperactivity of neuronal circuits. These neuronal overgrowth phenotypes are present upon Pten knockout (KO) and reconstitution with autism-associated point mutations. The mechanism underlying dendritic overgrowth in Pten deficient neurons is unclear. In this study, we examined how Pten loss impacts microtubule dynamics in both sexes using retroviral infection and transfection strategies to manipulate PTEN expression and tag the plus-end microtubule binding protein, EB3. We found Pten KO neurons sprout more new processes over time compared to wild-type (WT) neurons. We also found an increase in microtubule polymerization rate in Pten KO dendritic growth cones. Reducing microtubule polymerization rate to the WT level was sufficient to reduce dendritic overgrowth in Pten KO neurons in vitro and in vivo Finally, we found that rescue of dendritic overgrowth via inhibition of microtubule polymerization was sufficient to improve the performance of Pten KO mice in a spatial memory task. Taken together, our data suggests that one factor underlying PTEN loss dependent dendritic overgrowth is increased microtubule polymerization. This opens the possibility for an intersectional approach targeting microtubule polymerization and mTOR with low doses of inhibitors to achieve therapeutic gains with minimal side-effects in pathologies associated with loss of neuronal PTEN function.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT:Loss of Pten function due to genetic deletion or expression of mutations associated with autism spectrum disorder, results in overgrowth of neurons including increased total dendritic length and branching. We have discovered that this overgrowth is accompanied by increased rate of microtubule polymerization. The increased polymerization rate is insensitive to acute inhibition of mTorC1 or protein synthesis. Direct pharmacological inhibition of microtubule polymerization can slow the polymerization rate in Pten knockout neurons to rates seen in wild-type neurons. Correction of the microtubule polymerization rate rescues increased total dendritic arborization and spatial memory. Our studies suggest that PTEN inhibits dendritic growth through parallel regulation of protein synthesis and cytoskeletal polymerization.
35101921|a|Observers with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) find it difficult to read intentions from movements. However, the computational bases of these difficulties are unknown. Do these difficulties reflect an intention readout deficit, or are they more likely rooted in kinematic (dis-)similarities between typical and ASD kinematics? We combined motion tracking, psychophysics, and computational analyses to uncover single-trial intention readout computations in typically developing (TD) children (n = 35) and children with ASD (n = 35) who observed actions performed by TD children and children with ASD. Average intention discrimination performance was above chance for TD observers but not for ASD observers. However, single-trial analysis showed that both TD and ASD observers read single-trial variations in movement kinematics. TD readers were better able to identify intention-informative kinematic features during observation of TD actions; conversely, ASD readers were better able to identify intention-informative features during observation of ASD actions. Crucially, while TD observers were generally able to extract the intention information encoded in movement kinematics, those with autism were unable to do so. These results extend existing conceptions of mind reading in ASD by suggesting that intention reading difficulties reflect both an interaction failure, rooted in kinematic dissimilarity between TD and ASD kinematics (at the level of feature identification), and an individual readout deficit (at the level of information extraction), accompanied by an overall reduced sensitivity of intention readout to single-trial variations in movement kinematics.
35101401|a|BACKGROUND: The paucity of research investigating the role of the physical environment in the developmental progression of conduct problems and the potential moderating effects of intellectual disability (ID) is surprising, given the clinical relevance of elucidating environmental determinants of disruptive behaviours. AIMS: To use data from a large UK cohort study to assess associations between physical environmental exposures, ID, and conduct problem trajectories. METHOD: The sample included 8168 Millennium Cohort Study children (1.9% with ID). Multilevel growth curve modelling was used to examine the role of physical environment characteristics in the developmental trajectories of conduct problems after adjustments for ID status. RESULTS: Exposure to external environmental domains was not associated with differences in children's conduct problems across development. Alternatively, internal aspects of the household environment: spatial density (b = 0.40, p < .001) and damp problems (b = 0.14, p < .001) were both significantly associated with increased trajectories. Various individual and familial covariates were positively associated with conduct problems over time, including: presence of ID (b = 0.96, p < .001), autism spectrum disorder (b = 1.18, p < .001), male sex (b = 0.26, p < .001), poverty (b = 0.19, p < .001), maternal depression (b = 0.65, p < .001), and non-nuclear family structure (b = 0.35, p < .001). Positive ID status appeared to moderate the effects of internal household spatial density, reporting a non-linear negative association with spatial density and conduct problems across development (b = -1.08, p < .01). CONCLUSIONS: Our findings highlight the potential harmful consequences of poor internal residential conditions on children's development of disruptive behaviours.
35101065|a|BACKGROUND: Structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) studies have shown atypicalities in structural brain changes in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), while a noticeable discrepancy in their results indicates the necessity of conducting further researches. METHODS: The current study investigated the atypical structural brain features of autistic individuals who aged 6-30 years old. A total of 52 autistic individuals and 50 age-, gender-, and intelligence quotient (IQ)-matched typically developing (TD) individuals were included in this study, and were assigned into three based cohorts: childhood (6-12 years old), adolescence (13-18 years old), and adulthood (19-30 years old). Analyses of whole-brain volume and voxel-based morphometry (VBM) on the sMRI data were conducted. RESULTS: No significant difference was found in the volumes of whole-brain, gray matter, and white matter between the autism and TD groups in the three age-based cohorts. For VBM analyses, the volumes of gray matter in the right superior temporal gyrus and right inferior parietal lobule in the autism group (6-12 years old) were smaller than those in the TD group; the gray matter volume in the left inferior parietal lobule in the autism group (13-18 years old) was larger than that in the TD group; the gray matter volume in the right middle occipital gyrus in the autism group (19-30 years old) was larger than that in the TD group, and the gray matter volume in the left posterior cingulate gyrus in the autism group was smaller than that in the TD group. CONCLUSION: Autistic individuals showed different atypical regional gray matter volumetric changes in childhood, adolescence, and adulthood compared to their TD peers, indicating that it is essential to consider developmental stages of the brain when exploring brain structural atypicalities in autism.
35099792|a|Synaptic degeneration is one of the earliest and phenotypically most significant features associated with numerous neurodegenerative conditions, including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases. Synaptic changes are also known to be important in neurocognitive disorders such as schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders. Several labs, including ours, have demonstrated that conventional (fluorescence-based) flow cytometry of individual synaptosomes is a robust and reproducible method. However, the repertoire of probes needed to assess comprehensively the type of synapse, pathologic proteins (including protein products of risk genes discovered in GWAS), and markers of stress and injury far exceeds what is achievable with conventional flow cytometry. We recently developed a method that applies CyTOF (Cytometry by Time-Of-Flight mass spectrometry) to high-dimensional analysis of individual human synaptosomes, overcoming many of the multiplexing limitations of conventional flow cytometry. We call this new method Mass Synaptometry. Here we describe the preparation of synaptosomes from human and mouse brain, the generation and quality control of the "SynTOF" (Synapse by Time-Of-Flight mass spectrometry) antibody panel, the staining protocol, and CyTOF parameter setup for acquisition, post-acquisition processing, and analysis.
35099659|a|Evidence suggests that the visual evoked potential (VEP) and gamma oscillations elicited by visual stimuli reflect the balance of excitatory and inhibitory (E-I) cortical processes. As tDCS has been shown to modulate E-I balance, the current study investigated whether amplitudes of VEP components (N1 and P2) and peak gamma frequency are modulated by transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS). Healthy adults underwent two electroencephalography (EEG) recordings while viewing stimuli designed to elicit a robust visual response. Between the two recordings, participants were randomly assigned to three tDCS conditions (anodal-, cathodal-, and sham-tDCS) or received no-tDCS. tDCS electrodes were placed over the occipital cortex (Oz) and the left cheek with an intensity of 2 mA for 10 min. Data of 39 participants were analysed for VEP amplitudes and peak gamma frequency using mixed-model ANOVAs. The results showed no main effects of tDCS in any metric. Possible explanations for the absence of tDCS effects are discussed.
35099540|a|Importance: It is unclear to what extent the duration of screen time in infancy is associated with the subsequent diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. Objective: To examine the association between screen time in infancy and the development of autism spectrum disorder at 3 years of age. Design, Setting, and Participants: This cohort study analyzed data from mother-child dyads in a large birth cohort in Japan. This study included children born to women recruited between January 2011 and March 2014, and data were analyzed in December 2020. The study was conducted by the Japan Environment and Children's Study Group in collaboration with 15 regional centers across Japan. Exposures: Screen time at 1 year of age. Main Outcomes and Measures: The outcome variable, children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder at 3 years of age, was assessed using a questionnaire administered to mothers of the participating children. Results: A total of 84 030 mother-child dyads were analyzed. The prevalence of children with autism spectrum disorder at 3 years of age was 392 per 100 000 (0.4%), and boys were 3 times more likely to have been diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder than were girls. Logistic regression analysis showed that among boys, when "no screen" was the reference, the adjusted odds ratios were as follows: less than 1 hour, odds ratio, 1.38 (95 % CI, 0.71-2.69; P = .35), 1 hour to less than 2 hours, odds ratio, 2.16 (95 % CI, 1.13-4.14; P = .02), 2 hours to less than 4 hours, odds ratio, 3.48 (95% CI, 1.83-6.65; P < .001), and more than 4 hours, odds ratio, 3.02 (95% CI, 1.44-6.34; P = .04). Among girls, however, there was no association between autism spectrum disorder and screen time. Conclusions and Relevance: Among boys, longer screen time at 1 year of age was significantly associated with autism spectrum disorder at 3 years of age. With the rapid increase in device usage, it is necessary to review the health effects of screen time on infants and to control excessive screen time.
35098912|a|BACKGROUND: Do genetic risk profiles for drug use disorder (DUD), major depression (MD), and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) differ substantially as a function of sex, age at onset (AAO), recurrence, mode of ascertainment, and treatment? METHODS: Family genetic risk scores (FGRS) for MD, anxiety disorders, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, alcohol use disorder, DUD, ADHD, and autism-spectrum disorder were calculated from 1st-5th degree relatives in the Swedish population born 1932-1995 (n = 5 829 952). Profiles of these FGRS were obtained and compared across various subgroups of DUD, MD, and ADHD cases. RESULTS: Differences in FGRS profiles for DUD, MD, and ADHD by sex were modest, but they varied substantially by AAO, recurrence, ascertainment, and treatment with scores typically higher in cases with greater severity (e.g. early AAO, high recurrence, ascertainment in high intensity clinical settings, and treatment). However, severity was not always related to purer genetic profiles, as genetic risk for many disorders often increased together. However, some results, such as by mode of ascertainment from different Swedish registries, produced qualitative differences in FGRS profiles. CONCLUSIONS: Differences in FGRS profiles for DUD, MD, and ADHD varied substantially by AAO, recurrence, ascertainment, and treatment. Replication of psychiatric studies, particularly those examining genetic factors, may be difficult unless cases are matched not only by diagnosis but by important clinical characteristics. Genetic correlations between psychiatric disorders could arise through one disorder impacting on the patterns of ascertainment for the other, rather than from the direct effects of shared genetic liabilities.
35098539|a|BACKGROUND: Language regression, broadly defined as the loss of acquired language skills in early childhood, is a distinctive feature of autism. Little is known about the factors underlying regression or the prognosis of children who exhibit regression. We examine potential predictors of language regression and test its association with language development in a prospective longitudinal sample of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) from diagnosis to age 10 years. METHODS: We analysed data from Pathways in ASD, a prospective longitudinal study of 421 children enrolled around the time of an autism diagnosis between 2 and 5 years. Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised data were available for 408 children, of whom 90 (22%) were classified as having language regression. RESULTS: Demographic and other health factors including caregiver education, family income, child sex, reported seizures, and age of enrolment did not differ between children with and without language regression. Children with language regression walked earlier and attained first words sooner than those without regression. However, both groups attained phrase speech at comparable ages. Those with regression exhibited greater delays in expressive and receptive communication over the follow-up period, although this effect was attenuated when accounting for baseline differences in motor and cognitive ability. Overall, those with language regression continued to exhibit expressive but not receptive communication delay compared to those without regression. Communication trajectories were heterogeneous to age 10 years, irrespective of regression status. CONCLUSIONS: Although language regression can be alarming, our findings confirm that its occurrence does not necessarily foreshadow worse developmental outcomes relative to those without regression. Although a discrepancy in age-equivalent communication skills may persist, this can be expected to be of less practical importance with rising average levels of skills. Future studies need to account for the significant variability in language trajectories by considering factors beyond developmental regression.
35098496|a|BACKGROUND: Congenital cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection exhibits polymicrogyria, intracranial calcification, white matter lesions, and several types of intracranial lesions on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in addition to various developmental disorders and epilepsies. However, little is known on the presence of hippocampal abnormality in this affliction. The aim of this study is to clarify the incidence of hippocampal abnormality in congenital CMV infection. METHODS: Seventeen children diagnosed as having congenital CMV infection along with 17 age-matched pediatric controls were retrospectively evaluated by brain MRI and clinical review. The measurement data were obtained from conventional coronal sections in this retrospective study. Hippocampal malrotation (HIMAL) was defined as a hippocampal diameter ratio (i.e., the ratio of the height and width of the hippocampus) of > 0.92. RESULTS: Hippocampal diameter ratios were significantly higher in the congenital CMV infection group (0.99 [range: 0.70-1.58] on the right side and 0.85 [range: 0.66-1.39] on the left side) than in controls (0.71 [range: 0.58-0.91] and 0.70 [range: 0.50-1.00], respectively). HIMAL was present in 17 of 34 hippocampi (50%) in the congenital CMV infection group and 1 of 34 hippocampi (2.9%) in controls. No correlations were detected between HIMAL and intelligence quotient/developmental quotient or the occurrences of autism spectrum disorder or epilepsy. CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to demonstrate the incidence of hippocampal abnormality to be significantly higher in congenital CMV infection patients than in age-matched controls. Further study is necessary to clarify the associations of HIMAL with other clinical and developmental features.
35098449|a|Olduvai protein domains, encoded by the NBPF gene family, are responsible for the largest increase in copy number of any protein-coding region in the human genome. This has spawned various genetics studies which have linked these domains to human brain development and divergence from our primate ancestors, as well as currently relevant cognitive diseases such as schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). There are six separate Olduvai domains which together form the majority of the various protein products of the NBPF genes. The six domains include three conserved domains (CON1-3), and three human-lineage-specific domains (HLS1-3) which occur in triplet. Here, we present the solution nuclear magnetic resonance backbone assignments for the CON1 domain, which has been linked to the severity of ASD. The data confirm that CON1 is an intrinsically disordered protein (IDP). Additionally, we use innovative Halpha-detected experiments which allow us to not only assign the Halpha atoms and N atoms of proline residues, but also to assign residues where HN-experiments suffered from peak overlap or broadening.
35098421|a|People with disabilities often lack full access to corporate worship and participation in their faith communities. Yet many church leaders experience uncertainty about the steps they should take to remove barriers and widen the welcome for members of their community who are impacted by disability. This study examined the recommendations of people with disabilities regarding how churches should pursue greater accessibility. We interviewed 37 Christians who were members of a local church in Tennessee and who experienced various disabilities (i.e., visual impairments, intellectual disability, autism, physical disabilities, hearing impairments). Their guidance coalesced around nine primary actions: advocating, reflecting, asking, researching, equipping, embracing, proacting, including, and praying. We address key implications for churches striving to be inclusive of people with and without disabilities, as well as offer recommendations for future research.
35098165|a|This protocol describes using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) of a superecliptic pHluorin (SEP)-diacylglycerol lipase alpha (DAGLalpha) to measure membrane-bound DAGLalpha mobility in dendritic shafts of primary cultured cortical mouse neurons. This could serve as an excellent tool to analyze endocannabinoid-mediated synaptic plasticity. We have used this protocol to show that DAGLalpha surface dynamics play an integral role in regulating the dendritic spine. We also detail how we test the qualities of generated SEP-DAGLalpha in HEK293T cells by FRAP assay. For complete details on the use and execution of this profile, please refer to Yoon et al. (2021a).
35098022|a|Science evolves from prior approximations of its current form. Interest in changes in species over time was not a new concept when Darwin made his famous voyage to the Galapagos Islands; concern with speciation stretches back throughout the history of modern thought. Behavioral science also does and must evolve. Such change can be difficult, but it can also yield great dividends. The focus of the current special section is on a common mutation that appears to have emerged across these areas and the critical features that define an emerging research area-applied quantitative analysis of behavior (AQAB). In this introduction to the "Special Issue on Applications of Quantitative Methods," we will outline some of the common characteristics of research in this area, an exercise that will surely be outdated as the research area continues to progress. In doing so, we also describe how AQAB is relevant to theory, behavioral pharmacology, applied behavior analysis, and health behaviors. Finally, we provide a summary for the articles that appear in this special issue. The authors of these papers are all thinking outside the Skinner box, creating new tools and approaches, and testing them against relevant data. If we can keep up this evolution of methods and ideas, behavior analysis will regain its place at the head of the table!
35096980|a|In this paper, we investigate the impact of sensory sensitivity during robot-assisted training for children diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Indeed, user-adaptation for robot-based therapies could help users to focus on the training, and thus improve the benefits of the interactions. Children diagnosed with ASD often suffer from sensory sensitivity, and can show hyper or hypo-reactivity to sensory events, such as reacting strongly or not at all to sounds, movements, or touch. Considering it during robot therapies may improve the overall interaction. In the present study, thirty-four children diagnosed with ASD underwent a joint attention training with the robot Cozmo. The eight session training was embedded in the standard therapy. The children were screened for their sensory sensitivity with the Sensory Profile Checklist Revised. Their social skills were screened before and after the training with the Early Social Communication Scale. We recorded their performance and the amount of feedback they were receiving from the therapist through animations of happy and sad emotions played on the robot. Our results showed that visual and hearing sensitivity influenced the improvements of the skill to initiate joint attention. Also, the therapists of individuals with a high sensitivity to hearing chose to play fewer animations of the robot during the training phase of the robot activity. The animations did not include sounds, but the robot was producing motor noise. These results are supporting the idea that sensory sensitivity of children diagnosed with ASD should be screened prior to engaging the children in robot-assisted therapy.
35096886|a|Objectives: The associations of long-term risks of the full spectrum of mental disorders with clinically reassuring but suboptimal score range 7-9 remain unclear. This study investigated these associations during up to 38 years of follow-up. Methods: In a nationwide cohort study of 2,213,822 singletons born in Denmark during 1978-2015, we used cox regression to estimate the hazard ratio (HR) of mental disorders with a 95% CI. Results: A total of 3,00,679 (13.6%) individuals were diagnosed with mental disorders. The associations between suboptimal Apgar score 7-9 and mental disorders differed by attained age. In childhood (<= 18 years), declining Apgar scores were associated with increased risks of overall mental disorders with HRs (95% CI) of 1.13(1.11-1.15), 1.34 (1.27-1.41), and 1.48 (1.31-1.67) for Apgar scores of 7-9, 4-6, and 1-3, respectively, compared with a score of 10. A dose-response association was seen even within the score range from 9 to 7 (HR 1.11 [95% CI: 1.08-1.13], 1.14 [1.10-1.18], and 1.20 [1.14-1.27], respectively). Of note, individuals with scores of 7-9 had increased risks of organic disorders (HR: 1.27, 95% CI: 1.05-1.53), neurotic disorders (HR: 1.07, 95% CI: 1.03-1.11), and a wide range of neurodevelopmental disorders, such as intellectual disability (1.87, 1.76-1.98), childhood autism (1.13, 1.05-1.22) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (1.10, 1.06-1.15). In early adulthood (19-39 years), suboptimal Apgar scores 7-9 were not associated with the risks of overall and specific mental disorders. Conclusion: Infants born with clinically reassuring but suboptimal 5-min scores 7-9 are at increased risks of a wide spectrum of mental disorders in childhood.
35096715|a|Objective: This study aimed to investigate the possible association among vitamin D, screen time and other factors that might affect the concentration of vitamin D in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Methods: In total, 306 children with ASD were recruited, and data, including their age, sex, height, weight, screen time, time of outdoor activity, ASD symptoms [including Autism Behavior Checklist (ABC), Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) and Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule-Second Edition (ADOS-2)] and vitamin D concentrations, were collected. A multiple linear regression model was used to analyze the factors related to the vitamin D concentration. Results: A multiple linear regression analysis showed that screen time (beta = -0.122, P = 0.032), age (beta = -0.233, P < 0.001), and blood collection month (reflecting sunshine duration) (beta = 0.177, P = 0.004) were statistically significant. The vitamin D concentration in the children with ASD was negatively correlated with screen time and age and positively correlated with sunshine duration. Conclusion: The vitamin D levels in children with ASD are related to electronic screen time, age and sunshine duration. Since age and season are uncontrollable, identifying the length of screen time in children with ASD could provide a basis for the clinical management of their vitamin D nutritional status.
35096542|a|Substance abuse by women of child-bearing age and fetal in utero drug exposure has increased in the number of infants born with health issues. Prenatal exposure to psychoactive substances can lead to neurological and neurodevelopmental deficits later in life. Useful data concerning the effects of psychoactive drugs on fetal neurodevelopmental status are sparse. Understanding the neurodevelopmental consequences of prenatally drug-exposed children has become a pressing global concern. The aim of this review is to gather current evidence and information on neurodevelopmental outcomes of in utero drug exposure. A literature search was performed on the PubMed, Scopus, and Google Scholar databases using the terms "psychotropic drugs", "neurodevelopmental consequences", "prenatal drug exposure", and "pregnancy". Available studies on in utero drug exposure were reviewed and found to support the idea that some degree of health issues are present in fetuses and children. Different psychoactive substances have profound neurodevelopmental consequences, such as structural brain changes, poor attention span, Down syndrome, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, autism spectrum disorder, imbalances in neurotransmitter levels, and many structural deficits. The pervasive use of psychoactive drugs in women of child-bearing age is an important health concern. Further scientific efforts are needed to investigate the effect of prenatal exposure to psychoactive drugs on children.
35096138|a|Background: Students with ASD have some of the worst postsecondary outcomes when compared to other students with disabilities indicating transition planning may not be working effectively. One source of support for postsecondary planning is development of the transition Individualized Education Program (IEP). However, little research is available to describe the current contents of transition IEPs for students with ASD. This study aimed to describe IEP and postsecondary planning quality for students with autism in their final year of high school. Method: IEPs for 20 students with autism (Mage = 18.2 years; SD = 1.1) from two mid-southern states were analyzed. Descriptive analyses were used to identify strengths and weaknesses of IEPs and postsecondary goals based on federal law requirements and best practice recommendations. Results: IEPs contained an average of 3.1 IEP goals and 1.6 postsecondary goals. IEP goals were most frequently related to academic, learning/work, or communication skills. All IEPs contained an employment postsecondary goal while less than half of the IEPs included an independent living postsecondary goal. Key findings include lack of goals related to social skills and the lack of alignment between present levels of performance, IEP goals, and postsecondary goals. Conclusions: IEPs for students with ASD in their final year of school do not consistently meet standards outlined by federal law or best practice recommendations necessary for successful transition from high school.
35095745|a|SNAREs (soluble N-ethylmaleimide sensitive factor attachment protein receptor) are an heterogeneous family of proteins that, together with their key regulators, are implicated in synaptic vesicle exocytosis and synaptic transmission. SNAREs represent the core component of this protein complex. Although the specific mechanisms of the SNARE machinery is still not completely uncovered, studies in recent years have provided a clearer understanding of the interactions regulating the essential fusion machinery for neurotransmitter release. Mutations in genes encoding SNARE proteins or SNARE complex associated proteins have been associated with a variable spectrum of neurological conditions that have been recently defined as "SNAREopathies." These include neurodevelopmental disorder, autism spectrum disorder (ASD), movement disorders, seizures and epileptiform abnormalities. The SNARE phenotypic spectrum associated with seizures ranges from simple febrile seizures and infantile spasms, to severe early-onset epileptic encephalopathies. Our study aims to review and delineate the epileptic phenotypes associated with dysregulation of synaptic vesicle exocytosis and transmission, focusing on the main proteins of the SNARE core complex (STX1B, VAMP2, SNAP25), tethering complex (STXBP1), and related downstream regulators.
35095453|a|Resting-state functional MRI (rs-fMRI) has been widely used for the early diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). With rs-fMRI, the functional connectivity networks (FCNs) are usually constructed for representing each subject, with each element representing the pairwise relationship between brain region-of-interests (ROIs). Previous studies often first extract handcrafted network features (such as node degree and clustering coefficient) from FCNs and then construct a prediction model for ASD diagnosis, which largely requires expert knowledge. Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have recently been employed to jointly perform FCNs feature extraction and ASD identification in a data-driven manner. However, existing studies tend to focus on the single-scale topology of FCNs by using one single atlas for ROI partition, thus ignoring potential complementary topology information of FCNs at different spatial scales. In this paper, we develop a multi-scale graph representation learning (MGRL) framework for rs-fMRI based ASD diagnosis. The MGRL consists of three major components: (1) multi-scale FCNs construction using multiple brain atlases for ROI partition, (2) FCNs representation learning via multi-scale GCNs, and (3) multi-scale feature fusion and classification for ASD diagnosis. The proposed MGRL is evaluated on 184 subjects from the public Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE) database with rs-fMRI scans. Experimental results suggest the efficacy of our MGRL in FCN feature extraction and ASD identification, compared with several state-of-the-art methods.
35095442|a|Rats are highly social animals known to communicate with ultrasonic vocalizations (USV) of different frequencies. Calls around 50 kHz are thought to represent a positive affective state, whereas calls around 22 kHz are believed to serve as alarm or distress calls. During playback of natural 50-kHz USV, rats show a reliable and strong social approach response toward the sound source. While this response has been studied in great detail in numerous publications, little is known about the emission of USV in response to natural 50-kHz USV playback. To close this gap, we capitalized on three data sets previously obtained and analyzed USV evoked by natural 50-kHz USV playback in male juvenile rats. We compared different rat stocks, namely Wistar (WI) and Sprague-Dawley (SD) and investigated the pharmacological treatment with the dopaminergic D2 receptor antagonist haloperidol. These response calls were found to vary broadly inter-individually in numbers, mean peak frequencies, durations and frequency modulations. Despite the large variability, the results showed no major differences between experimental conditions regarding call likelihood or call parameters, representing a robust phenomenon. However, most response calls had clearly lower frequencies and were longer than typical 50-kHz calls, i.e., around 30 kHz and lasting generally around 0.3 s. These calls resemble aversive 22-kHz USV of adult rats but were of higher frequencies and shorter durations. Moreover, blockade of dopamine D2 receptors did not substantially affect the emission of response calls suggesting that they are not dependent on the D2 receptor function. Taken together, this study provides a detailed analysis of response calls toward playback of 50-kHz USV in juvenile WI and SD rats. This includes calls representing 50-kHz USV, but mostly calls with lower frequencies that are not clearly categorizable within the so far known two main groups of USV in adult rats. We discuss the possible functions of these response calls addressing their communicative functions like contact or appeasing calls, and whether they may reflect a state of frustration. In future studies, response calls might also serve as a new read-out in rat models for neuropsychiatric disorders, where acoustic communication is impaired, such as autism spectrum disorder.
35095415|a|Objective: To prove microtubule associated serine/threonine kinase 3 (MAST3) gene is associated with neurodevelopmental diseases (NDD) and the genotype-phenotype correlation. Methods: Trio exome sequencing (trio ES) was performed on four NDD trios. Bioinformatic analysis was conducted based on large-scale genome sequencing data and human brain transcriptomic data. Further in vivo zebrafish studies were performed. Results: In our study, we identified four de novo MAST3 variants (NM_015016.1: c.302C > T:p.Ser101Phe; c.311C > T:p.Ser104Leu; c.1543G > A:p.Gly515Ser; and c.1547T > C:p.Leu516Pro) in four patients with developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE) separately. Clinical heterogeneities were observed in patients carrying variants in domain of unknown function (DUF) and serine-threonine kinase (STK) domain separately. Using the published large-scale exome sequencing data, higher CADD scores of missense variants in DUF domain were found in NDD cohort compared with gnomAD database. In addition, we obtained an excess of missense variants in DUF domain when compared autistic spectrum disorder (ASD) cohort with gnomAD database, similarly an excess of missense variants in STK domain when compared DEE cohort with gnomAD database. Based on Brainspan datasets, we showed that MAST3 expression was significantly upregulated in ASD and DEE-related brain regions and was functionally linked with DEE genes. In zebrafish model, abnormal morphology of central nervous system was observed in mast3a/b crispants. Conclusion: Our results support the possibility that MAST3 is a novel gene associated with NDD which could expand the genetic spectrum for NDD. The genotype-phenotype correlation may contribute to future genetic counseling.
35095389|a|The mission of the human stress system is the maintenance of homeostasis in the presence of real or perceived, acute or chronic stressors. The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the autonomic nervous system (ANS) are the stress system-related neuroendocrine pathways. There is abundant evidence that children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) may exhibit atypical function within the HPA axis and the ANS both at the resting state and during the presence of social and/or non-social stressors. The aim of this review is to provide an up-to-date summary of the findings regarding stress system alterations in children and adolescents with ASD. We focus on the variations of stress hormones circadian rhythms, specifically cortisol and alpha-amylase (i.e., a surrogate index of epinephrine/norepinephrine secretion), and on the alterations of stress system responsivity to different stressors. Also, we present imaging and immunological findings that have been associated with stress system dysregulation in children and adolescents with ASD. Finally, we review the pivotal role of HPA axis-ANS coordination, the developmental trajectory of the stress system in ASD, and the possible role of early life stress in the dysregulation of the stress system demonstrated in children and adolescents with ASD. This synthesis will hopefully provide researchers with a foundation for an integrated approach to future research into stress system variations in children and adolescents with ASD.
35094913|a|BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Youths with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are at a high risk of involvement in school bully. The study investigated whether comorbid psychopathologies mediated the link between ASD and bullying involvement. METHODS: We assessed 353 youths (mean age, 11.8 +- 3.1 years), including 121 youths with ASD and 232 typically developing (TD) controls, using semi-structured diagnostic interviews on ASD and other psychiatric conditions. Follow-up assessments took place 2-5 years (37.6 +- 15 months) later. Meanwhile, their parents reported on the Social Adjustment Inventory for Children and Adolescents about bullying involvement statuses. We identified significant mediators by simple mediation models, followed by multiple mediation models to scrutinize the mediation effects of selected mediators. RESULTS: The results showed a sevenfold increased risk of bullying involvement among youths with ASD compared with TD controls at follow-up. In general, psychopathologies mediated the link between ASD and bullying involvement, even independent of age and sex. Specifically, we found mediating effects of social problems on victimization-only and aggressive behaviors on victimization-perpetration. CONCLUSION: Our findings strongly suggest the link between ASD and later bullying involvement is mediated by pre-existing comorbid psychiatric conditions, besides the direct effect of ASD on bullying victimization. Hence, early identification and intervention of these psychopathologies are highly suggested.
35094443|a|PAX5 is a transcription factor associated with abnormal posterior midbrain and cerebellum development in mice. PAX5 is highly loss-of-function intolerant and missense constrained, and has been identified as a candidate gene for autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We describe 16 individuals from 12 families who carry deletions involving PAX5 and surrounding genes, de novo frameshift variants that are likely to trigger nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, a rare stop-gain variant, or missense variants that affect conserved amino acid residues. Four of these individuals were published previously but without detailed clinical descriptions. All these individuals have been diagnosed with one or more neurodevelopmental phenotypes including delayed developmental milestones (DD), intellectual disability (ID), and/or ASD. Seizures were documented in four individuals. No recurrent patterns of brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings, structural birth defects, or dysmorphic features were observed. Our findings suggest that PAX5 haploinsufficiency causes a neurodevelopmental disorder whose cardinal features include DD, variable ID, and/or ASD.
35094316|a|Gut microbiota plays a major role in neurological disorders, including autism. Modulation of the gut microbiota through fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) or probiotic administration, such as Bifidobacteria, is suggested to alleviate autistic symptoms; however, their effects on the brain are not fully examined. We tested both approaches in a propionic acid (PPA) rodent model of autism as treatment strategies. Autism was induced in Sprague-Dawley rats by administering PPA orally (250 mg/kg) for 3 days. Animals were later treated with either saline, FMT, or Bifidobacteria for 22 days. Control animals were treated with saline throughout the study. Social behavior and selected brain biochemical markers related to stress hormones, inflammation, and oxidative stress were assessed. PPA treatment induced social impairments, which was rescued by the treatments. In the brain, Bifidobacteria treatment increased oxytocin relative to control and PPA groups. Moreover, Bifidobacteria treatment rescued the PPA-induced increase in IFN-gamma levels. Both treatments increased GST levels, which was diminished by the PPA treatment. These findings indicate the potential of gut microbiota-targeted therapeutics in ameliorating behavioral deficit and underlying neural biochemistry.
35093761|a|Maternal immune activation (MIA) with poly(I:C) is a preclinical paradigm for schizophrenia and autism research. Methodological variations, including poly(I:C) molecular weight, contribute to inconsistencies in behavioural and molecular outcomes. We established in Wistar rats that 4 mg/kg high molecular weight (HMW)-poly(I:C) on GD19 induces maternal sickness, smaller litters and maternal elevations of serum cytokines, including increases in monocyte chemoattractants. In adult offspring, we found that males have higher serum cytokines than females, and MIA did not alter peripheral cytokines in either sex. Our study will contribute to the effective use of the MIA model to elucidate the neurobiology of neurodevelopmental disorders.
35093163|a|BACKGROUND: Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS) is caused by 22q13 deletions including SHANK3 or pathogenic sequence variants in SHANK3 and is among the more common rare genetic findings in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). SHANK3 is critical for synaptic function, and preclinical and clinical studies suggest that insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) can reverse a range of deficits in PMS. IGF-1 release is stimulated by growth hormone secretion from the anterior pituitary gland, and this study sought to assess the feasibility of increasing IGF-1 levels through recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) treatment, in addition to establishing safety and exploring efficacy of rhGH in children with PMS. METHODS: rhGH was administered once daily for 12 weeks to six children with PMS using an open-label design. IGF-1 levels, safety, and efficacy assessments were measured every 4 weeks throughout the study. RESULTS: rhGH administration increased levels of IGF-1 by at least 2 standard deviations and was well tolerated without serious adverse events. rhGH treatment was also associated with clinical improvement in social withdrawal, hyperactivity, and sensory symptoms. LIMITATIONS: Results should be interpreted with caution given the small sample size and lack of a placebo control. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, findings are promising and indicate the need for larger studies with rhGH in PMS. Trial registration NCT04003207. Registered July 1, 2019, https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04003207 .
35093157|a|BACKGROUND: Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common human genetic disease with age-dependent phenotype progression. The overview of clinical and radiological findings evaluated by whole-body magnetic resonance imaging (WBMRI) in NF1 patients < 3 years old assessed with a genetic contribution to disease progression is presented herein. METHODS: This study included 70 clinically or genetically diagnosed NF1 patients who received WBMRI before 3 years old. Clinical, genetic, and radiologic features were collected by retrospective chart review. In NF1+, widely spread diffuse cutaneous neurofibromas, developmental delay, autism, seizure, cardiac abnormalities, hearing defect, optic pathway glioma, severe plexiform neurofibromas (> 3 cm in diameter, disfigurement, accompanying pain, bony destruction, or located para-aortic area), brain tumors, nerve root tumors, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, moyamoya disease, and bony dysplasia were included. RESULTS: The age at WBMRI was 1.6 +- 0.7 years old, and NF1 mutations were found in 66 patients (94.3%). Focal areas of signal intensity (FASI) were the most common WBMRI finding (66.1%), followed by optic pathway glioma (15.7%), spine dural ectasia (12.9%), and plexiform neurofibromas (10.0%). Plexiform neurofibromas and NF1+ were more prevalent in familial case (28.7% vs 5.7%, p = 0.030; 71.4% vs 30.2%, p = 0.011). Follow-up WBMRI was conducted in 42 patients (23 girls and 19 boys) after 1.21 +- 0.50 years. FASI and radiologic progression were more frequent in patients with mutations involving GTPase activating protein-related domain (77.8% vs 52.4%, p = 0.047; 46.2% vs 7.7%, p = 0.029). CONCLUSIONS: WBMRI provides important information for the clinical care for young pediatric NF1 patients. As NF1 progresses in even these young patients, and is related to family history and the affected NF1 domains, serial evaluation with WBMRI should be assessed based on the clinical and genetic features for the patients' best care.
35092537|a|
35091509|a|Alterations in the TAOK1 gene have recently emerged as the cause of developmental delay with or without intellectual impairment or behavioral abnormalities (MIM #619575). The thirty-two cases currently described in the literature have predominantly de novo alterations in TAOK1 and a wide spectrum of neurodevelopmental abnormalities. Here, we report four patients with novel pathogenic TAOK1 variants identified by research genome sequencing, clinical exome sequencing, and international matchmaking. The overlapping clinical features of our patients are consistent with the emerging core phenotype of TAOK1-associated syndrome: facial dysmorphism, feeding difficulties, global developmental delay, joint laxity, and hypotonia. However, behavioral abnormalities and gastrointestinal issues are more common in our cohort than previously reported. Two patients have de novo TAOK1 variants (one missense, one splice site) consistent with most known alterations in this gene. However, we also report the first sibling pair who both inherited a TAOK1 frameshift variant from a mildly affected mother. Our findings suggest that incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity are relatively common in TAOK1-associated syndrome, which holds important implications for clinical genetic testing.
35091116|a|Fragile X syndrome (FXS; MIM 300624) is an X-linked genetic disorder characterized by physical abnormalities associated with intellectual disability and a wide spectrum of neurological and psychiatric impairments. FXS occurs more frequently in males, 1 in 5000 males and 1 in 8000 females accounting for 1-2% of overall intellectual disability (ID). In more than 99% of patients, FXS results from expansions of a CGG triplet repeat (>200 in male) of the FMR1 gene. In the last years an increasing number, albeit still limited, of FXS subjects carrying FMR1 mutations including deletions, splicing errors, missense, and nonsense variants was reported. Nevertheless, the studies concerning the functional consequences of mutations in the FMR1 gene are rare so far and, therefore, we do not have sufficient knowledge regarding the genotype/phenotype correlation. We report a child carrying a hemizygous missense FMR1 (NM_002024.5:c.1325G > A p.Arg442Gln) variant, maternally inherited, associated with facial abnormalities, developmental delay, and social and communication deficits assessed with formal neuropsychological tests. The study contributes to highlighting the clinical differences between the CGG triplet repeat dependent phenotype and FMR1variant dependent phenotype and it also confirms the pathogenicity of the variant being reported for the second time in the literature.
35089488|a|This study evaluated 32 children (mean age: 8.5 y) with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and 23 healthy controls (similar age, sex, and Tanner stage) for hyperandrogenism. These children underwent sexual maturity rating (Tanner staging), ASD severity assessment (Childhood Autism Rating Scale), and quantitative estimation for plasma testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS), and androstenedione. There was no significant difference in androgen levels in the two groups. Elevated (> 95 centiles) testosterone, DHEAS, and androstenedione levels were seen in 12.3%, 6.2%, and 9% children with ASD, and 7/9 of these children (78%) with hyperandrogenism had severe ASD. However, there was no significant correlation between ASD severity and androgen levels.
35089434|a|Provider referral is one of the most influential factors in research recruitment. To ease referral burden on providers, we adapted the Best Practice Alert (BPA) in the EPIC Electronic Health Record and assessed its utility in recruiting pediatric patients with autism spectrum disorder for the national SPARK study. During a year-long surveillance, 1203 (64.0%) patients were Interested in SPARK and 223 enrolled. Another 754 participants not recruited via the BPA also enrolled; 35.5% of these participants completed their participation compared to 58.3% of BPA-referred participants. Results suggest that (a) a BPA can successfully engage providers in the study-referral process and (b) families who learn about research through their providers may be more engaged and effectively retained.
35088940|a|LRFN5 is a regulator of synaptic development and the only gene in a 5.4 Mb mammalian-specific conserved topologically associating domain (TAD); the LRFN5 locus. An association between locus structural changes and developmental delay (DD) and/or autism was suggested by several cases in DECIPHER and own records. More significantly, we found that maternal inheritance of a specific LRFN5 locus haplotype segregated with an identical type of autism in distantly related males. This autism-susceptibility haplotype had a specific TAD pattern. We also found a male/female quantitative difference in the amount histone-3-lysine-9-associated chromatin around the LRFN5 gene itself (p < 0.01), possibly related to the male-restricted autism susceptibility. To better understand locus behavior, the prevalence of a 60 kb deletion polymorphism was investigated. Surprisingly, in three cohorts of individuals with DD (n = 8757), the number of deletion heterozygotes was 20%-26% lower than expected from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. This suggests allelic interaction, also because the conversions from heterozygosity to wild-type or deletion homozygosity were of equal magnitudes. Remarkably, in a control group of medical students (n = 1416), such conversions were three times more common (p = 0.00001), suggesting a regulatory role of this allelic interaction. Taken together, LRFN5 regulation appears unusually complex, and LRFN5 dysregulation could be an epigenetic cause of autism. LAY SUMMARY: LRFN5 is involved with communication between brain cells. The gene sits alone in a huge genomic niche, called the LRFN5 locus, of complex structure and high mammalian conservation. We have found that a specific locus structure increases autism susceptibility in males, but we do not yet know how common this epigenetic cause of autism is. It is, however, a cause that potentially could explain why higher-functioning autism is more common in males than females.
35088528|a|Interoception refers to the awareness of internal physiological state. Several previous studies reported that people with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) have diverse patterns of interoception, but the extent of literature is limited and inconsistent. This study aimed to investigate the interoceptive accuracy (IA) in children with ASD, children with comorbid ASD and ADHD, and typically developing (TD) children with high and low levels of autistic traits. We administered the eye-tracking interoceptive accuracy task (EIAT) to 30 children with ASD, 20 children with comorbid ASD and ADHD, and 63 TD controls with high and low levels of autistic traits. Parent-report scales concerning ASD and ADHD symptoms were collected. ASD children with and without comorbid ADHD both exhibited lower IA than TD children. Reduced IA was also found in TD children with high-autistic traits relative to those with low-autistic traits. IA was negatively correlated with autistic and ADHD symptoms. Atypical cardiac interoception could be found in children with ASD. Difficulties in sensing and comprehending internal bodily signals in childhood may be related to both ASD and ADHD symptoms.
35088201|a|BACKGROUND: Multimorbidity (>= 2 chronic diseases) is associated with greater disability and higher treatment burden, as well as difficulty coordinating self-management tasks for adults with complex multimorbidity patterns. Comparatively little work has focused on assessing multimorbidity patterns among patients seeking care in community health centers (CHCs). OBJECTIVE: To identify and characterize prevalent multimorbidity patterns in a multi-state network of CHCs over a 5-year period. DESIGN: A cohort study of the 2014-2019 ADVANCE multi-state CHC clinical data network. We identified the most prevalent multimorbidity combination patterns and assessed the frequency of patterns throughout a 5-year period as well as the demographic characteristics of patient panels by prevalent patterns. PARTICIPANTS: The study included data from 838,642 patients aged >= 45 years who were seen in 337 CHCs across 22 states between 2014 and 2019. MAIN MEASURES: Prevalent multimorbidity patterns of somatic, mental health, and mental-somatic combinations of 22 chronic diseases based on the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Multiple Chronic Conditions framework: anxiety, arthritis, asthma, autism, cancer, cardiac arrhythmia, chronic kidney disease (CKD), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), congestive heart failure, coronary artery disease, dementia, depression, diabetes, hepatitis, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hyperlipidemia, hypertension, osteoporosis, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), schizophrenia, substance use disorder, and stroke. KEY RESULTS: Multimorbidity is common among middle-aged and older patients seen in CHCs: 40% have somatic, 6% have mental health, and 24% have mental-somatic multimorbidity patterns. The most frequently occurring pattern across all years is hyperlipidemia-hypertension. The three most frequent patterns are various iterations of hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and diabetes and are consistent in rank of occurrence across all years. CKD-hyperlipidemia-hypertension and anxiety-depression are both more frequent in later study years. CONCLUSIONS: CHCs are increasingly seeing more complex multimorbidity patterns over time; these most often involve mental health morbidity and advanced cardiometabolic-renal morbidity.
35087441|a|Background: Cinematherapy and video treatments are artistic therapeutic techniques by which the individuals are exposed to their psycho-physical difficulties through the stories of the characters on the screen who are coping with the same issues that the patients are. Although these techniques are increasingly common within modern art therapies, there are neither comprehensive classifications of the different approaches nor agreement on their effectiveness. We performed a scoping review, describing different methodological approaches and outcome measures in cinematherapy and video treatments. Methodology: We searched articles in PubMed, PsycINFO and Google Scholar. We included: (i) articles in which subjects were treated for their difficulties with videos or films, (ii) articles written in English. Review articles and papers describing a research protocol without data collection were not included. Results: We analyzed 38 studies. Thirty-six reported a positive effect of the treatment. Seven studies used classical cinematherapy, adopting a qualitative approach to measure the therapy outcome. Thirty-one studies used different video treatments, 8 of which were defined as randomized controlled trials with specific objective therapy outcomes. Studies were mainly focused on behavioral and psychological difficulties in Autism Spectrum Disorders and Schizophrenia. Conclusion: Studies using video treatments more often rely upon structured experimental designs; on the contrary, those who used classical cinematherapy produced descriptive results. A more standardized methodological approach in terms of experimental design, procedure, and objective outcome measure is needed to provide evidence on the effectiveness of these techniques, promoting its application in the clinical field.
35087126|a|Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) perform poorly in working memory (WM) tasks, with some literature suggesting that their impaired performance is modulated by WM load. While some neuroimaging and neurophysiological studies have reported altered functional connectivity during WM processing in individuals with autism, it remains largely unclear whether such alterations are moderated by WM load. The present study aimed to examine the effect of WM load on functional connectivity within the prefrontal cortex (PFC) in ASD using functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS). Twenty-two children with high-functioning ASD aged 8-12 years and 24 age-, intelligent quotient (IQ)-, sex- and handedness-matched typically developing (TD) children performed a number n-back task with three WM loads (0-back, 1-back, and 2-back). Hemodynamic changes in the bilateral lateral and medial PFC during task performance were monitored using a multichannel NIRS device. Children with ASD demonstrated slower reaction times, specifically during the "low load" condition, than TD children. In addition, the ASD and TD groups exhibited differential load-dependent functional connectivity changes in the lateral and medial PFC of the right but not the left hemisphere. These findings indicate that WM impairment in high-functioning ASD is paralleled by load-dependent alterations in right, but not left, intrahemispheric connectivity during WM processing in children with ASD. A disruption of functional neural connections that support different cognitive processes may underlie poor performance in WM tasks in ASD.
35087123|a|Although the etiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is largely unknown, it is accepted that OCD is a complex disorder. There is a known bi-directional interaction between the gut microbiome and brain activity. Several authors have reported associations between changes in gut microbiota and neuropsychiatric disorders, including depression or autism. Furthermore, a pediatric-onset neuropsychiatric OCD-related syndrome occurs after streptococcal infection, which might indicate that exposure to certain microbes could be involved in OCD susceptibility. However, only one study has investigated the microbiome of OCD patients to date. We performed 16S ribosomal RNA gene-based metagenomic sequencing to analyze the stool and oropharyngeal microbiome composition of 32 OCD cases and 32 age and gender matched controls. We estimated different alpha- and beta-diversity measures and performed LEfSe and Wilcoxon tests to assess differences in bacterial distribution. OCD stool samples showed a trend towards lower bacterial alpha-diversity, as well as an increase of the relative abundance of Rikenellaceae, particularly of the genus Alistipes, and lower relative abundance of Prevotellaceae, and two genera within the Lachnospiraceae: Agathobacer and Coprococcus. However, we did not observe a different Bacteroidetes to Firmicutes ratio between OCD cases and controls. Analysis of the oropharyngeal microbiome composition showed a lower Fusobacteria to Actinobacteria ratio in OCD cases. In conclusion, we observed an imbalance in the gut and oropharyngeal microbiomes of OCD cases, including, in stool, an increase of bacteria from the Rikenellaceae family, associated with gut inflammation, and a decrease of bacteria from the Coprococcus genus, associated with DOPAC synthesis.
35086427|a|Aims: We investigated how infants grasped and transferred toys over a four-week period as they transitioned to arms-free sitting. We compared object manipulation in infants with typical likelihood (TL) and elevated likelihood (EL) for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) as they sat with vs. without support.Methods: Eighteen infants (7 EL; 11 TL; 5-8 months of age at the start of the study) were observed during three sessions at home across the transition to arms-free sitting. At each session, toys were presented to the infants in two different postures: sitting with support from a boppy pillow and sitting independently. Mean percentage of time spent grasping and rates of transferring objects between two hands were calculated for each infant at each session.Results: Both grasping time and transfer rate increased across the transition to arms-free sitting. EL infants, but not TL infants, spent significantly less time grasping toys when sitting independently than when sitting with support.Conclusions: Sitting plays a significant role in the development of object manipulation skills. Our results reveal a need to examine object manipulation skills in multiple posture contexts, especially in infants who exhibit motor delays.
35085933|a|OBJECTIVE: To determine if higher exposures measured in early childhood to environmental phenols, phthalates, pesticides, and/or trace elements, are associated with increased odds of having a diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), Developmental Delay (DD), or Other Early Concerns (OEC) compared to typically developing children (TD). METHODS: This study included 627 children between the ages of 2-5 who participated in the Childhood Autism Risks from Genetics and Environment (CHARGE) study. Urine samples were collected at the same study visit where diagnostic assessments to confirm diagnosis indicated during the recruitment process were performed. Adjusted multinomial regression models of each chemical with diagnosis as the outcome were conducted. Additionally, two methods were used to analyze mixtures: repeated holdout multinomial weighted quantile sum (WQS) regression for each chemical class; and a total urinary mixture effect was assessed with repeated holdout random subset WQS. RESULTS: Many urinary chemicals were associated with increased odds of ASD, DD or OEC compared to TD; however, most did not remain significant after false discovery rate adjustment. Repeated holdout WQS indices provided evidence for associations of both a phenol/paraben mixture effect and a trace element mixture effect on DD independently. In analyses adjusted for confounders and other exposures, results suggested an association of a pesticide mixture effect with increased risk for ASD. Results also suggested associations of a total urinary mixture with greater odds of both ASD and DD separately. CONCLUSION: Higher concentrations of urinary biomarkers were associated with ASD, DD, and OEC compared to TD, with consistency of the results comparing single chemical analyses and mixture analyses. Given that the biospecimens used for chemical analysis were generally collected many months after diagnoses were made, the direction of any causal association is unknown. Hence findings may reflect higher exposures among children with non-typical development than TD children due to differences in behaviors, metabolism, or toxicokinetics.
35085823|a|OBJECTIVES: Child Psychiatry Access Programs (CPAPs) provide consultative support for pediatric primary care providers (PCPs) to treat co-morbid mental health (MH) symptoms among patients with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). We examined differences in illness severity, co-morbidity, and psychotropic medication use between patients with and without ASD for whom PCPs sought consultation from Maryland's (MD)-CPAP. METHODS: We examined N= 3,641 MD-CPAP consultations from 2012 to 2019; n=311 were consultations for ASD. Demographics, treatment recommendations, diagnoses, and Clinical Global Impression-Severity (CGI-S) scores were collected. Patients who received psychotropic medication or psychotherapy by a MH provider were defined as co-managed. Descriptives and logistic regression were conducted. Sample for regression was N=1,854. RESULTS: Compared to non-ASD, consults regarding ASD patients were more often male (p<.001), aged 0-5 years (p<.001), severely ill (CGI-S> 4) (p<.001), and prescribed stimulants, non-stimulant ADHD medications, and antipsychotics (p<.001). Controlling for key covariates, consultations about youth: displaying aggression were 3.02 times (p<.001) more likely, with CGI-S>4 were 2.36 times (p<.001) more likely, and prescribed antipsychotics were 4.30 times more likely to concern an ASD patient (p<.001). A larger proportion of ASD patients (vs non-ASD) had co-morbid psychiatric diagnoses of ADHD, a Learning Disability, Disruptive Behavior Disorder vs. a smaller proportion with Major Depressive Disorder. CONCLUSIONS: ASD patients for whom PCPs sought MD-CPAP consultation were more severe and complex than non-ASD patients in terms of comorbid diagnoses and medication regimen. Findings suggest that consultations with CPAPs provide medication management support to pediatric PCPs treating ASD patients.
35085682|a|BACKGROUND: Studies found associations between atopic dermatitis (AD) and many comorbidities. OBJECTIVE: To appraise evidence of the association between AD and comorbidities among adults. METHODS: Our multidisciplinary work group conducted a systematic review of the association between AD and selected comorbidities. We applied the GRADE for prognosis approach for assessing the certainty of the evidence, providing statements of association based on the available evidence. RESULTS: Analysis of the evidence resulted in 32 statements. Clear evidence of the association of AD in adults and select allergic, atopic, immune-mediated, mental health and bone health conditions and skin infections was identified. There is some evidence supporting an association between AD and substance use, ADHD, and elements of metabolic syndrome. Evidence suggests a small association with various cardiovascular conditions. The association between AD in adults and autism spectrum disorders, myocardial infarction, stroke, and metabolic syndrome is inconclusive. LIMITATIONS: This analysis is based on the best available evidence at the time it was conducted. This guideline does not make recommendations for screening or management of comorbidities in adults with AD. CONCLUSIONS: Clinicians should be aware of comorbidities associated with AD. Further research is needed to determine whether screening or management of comorbidities is beneficial for adults with AD.
35085180|a|CASE: Benjamin is a 9-month-old, former 36-week gestation infant who presented to the high-risk infant follow-up clinic with parental concern for developmental regression. His mother reported that Benjamin seemed to be developing typically, but over the past 2 months, he has lost the ability to visually track objects, is not as engaged with her as he once was, and now only rarely makes babbling sounds. His mother also reported episodes of intermittent "bursts" of stiffening of his extremities and brief staring spells. Benjamin's mother described him as a "good, quiet baby." She commented that he used to laugh and cry more frequently but has recently been "very peaceful and calm." Benjamin's mother recently relayed her concerns for developmental regression to his pediatrician during an audio-only telehealth visit. Benjamin was referred to a pediatric neurologist, and the consultation visit is pending.His mother is a 28-year-old single parent whose pregnancy was complicated by pre-eclampsia, gestational diabetes, and anxiety. Benjamin required admission to the neonatal intensive care unit because of initial feeding difficulties. After 1 week, Benjamin was discharged to home and was referred for early intervention services. Owing to the pandemic, there were delays with initiating intervention, but bimonthly virtual interaction with a representative from the infant development program was eventually provided.Benjamin's mother expressed significant concerns regarding the potential of exposing him to a pandemic-related illness because of bringing her son to in-person medical visits. In fact, because of her concerns, she attended only virtual well-child pediatric visits over the past 6 months. A thorough social history revealed that she is a former dance studio instructor. The studio closed and she lost her primary source of income because of the pandemic. As a result, she decided to not send Benjamin to child care and maintained isolation from extended family members.On physical examination, pertinent findings included poor truncal tone, lack of orientation toward sounds, and limited eye contact. The Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development-Third Edition (Bayley-III) was administered, and the results indicated severe delays across all developmental areas, consistent with a diagnosis of global developmental delay.Benjamin's clinical presentation to the HRIF clinic and a history of developmental regression and intermittent body movements raised concerns for infantile spasms. He was transferred to the emergency department for evaluation and consideration for admission to the neurology service. An electroencephalogram confirmed epileptiform abnormalities consistent with infantile spasms, and he was immediately started on treatment.Impacts of the pandemic on the medical care of vulnerable/at-risk pediatric patients have included delayed receipt of early intervention services, parental fear regarding potential exposure to pandemic-related illness while seeking preventative care, increased use of virtual visit platforms for medical care and developmental intervention services, etc. What factors should be considered when providing support for these vulnerable/at-risk patients?
35084380|a|PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Sex/gender-related factors contribute to contextual issues influencing the recognition of autism and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and modulate how neurodevelopmental characteristics are manifested. This review summarizes the empirical literature to provide directions for improving clinical diagnostic practices. RECENT FINDINGS: Timing of autism and/or ADHD diagnosis, particularly in girls/women, is related to the individual's developmental characteristics and co-occurring diagnoses, and expectancy, alongside gender stereotype biases, of referral sources and clinicians. This is further compounded by sex and gender modulations of behavioural presentations. The emerging 'female autism phenotype' concept may serve as a helpful illustration of nuanced autism phenotypes, but should not be viewed as essential features of autism in a particular sex or gender. These nuanced phenotypes that can present across sexes and genders include heightened attention to socially salient stimuli, friendship and social groups, richness in language expression, and more reciprocal behaviours. The nuanced female-predominant ADHD phenotypes are characterized by subtle expressions in hyperactivity-impulsivity (e.g., hyper-verbal behaviours). Optimizing neurodevelopmental diagnoses across sexes and genders also requires an understanding of sex-related and gender-related variations in developmental trajectories, including compensation/masking efforts, and the influences of co-occurring conditions on clinical presentations. SUMMARY: Equitable diagnoses across sexes and genders for autism and ADHD require understanding of the nuanced presentations and the Gestalt clinical-developmental profiles, and addressing contextual biases that influence diagnostic practices.
35083939|a|LAY ABSTRACT: This study examined the impact of physical exercise on sleep and behavioral functioning in children (aged 8-12 years) with autism spectrum disorders. It also investigated whether exercise would alter endogenous melatonin level among the population. Participants were divided into two groups: exercise group (12-week, 30-min morning jogging intervention) and a control group (i.e. did not receive any physical exercise intervention during the study period). Significant improvements on sleep and behavioral functioning were found in the exercise group, but not in the control group Moreover, a significant increase in melatonin level was also shown in the exercise group. Findings of this study reconfirmed the sleep and behavioral benefits of exercise in children with autism spectrum disorder. Melatonin-mediated mechanism should be further explored to develop an effective treatment intervention.
35083932|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Parents of children with autism are known to experience severe hardships related to raising their children. These hardships are exacerbated in low-resource settings internationally where there is very little resource for children and their families, including professionals who provide evidence-based treatment. Mongolia was chosen as an example of such low-resource settings in this single-case research, and four parent mentors and five parent peers and their children with autism participated and completed the study. A local parent group, the Autism Association of Mongolia, was actively involved in this study and helped with recruitment, development, adaptation, and implementation of the intervention to increase acceptability and feasibility. In addition, a local bilingual research assistant was also utilized as the purpose of this study was to build capacity of diverse stakeholders of children with autism in Mongolia. The research assistant was trained and coached by the research team on both content (communication teaching strategies and behavior management) and delivery (coaching adults), who then provided coaching to parent mentors via live videoconferencing in Mongolian. Parent mentors then similarly provided coaching to parent peers after observing the interactions with their children with autism. The findings suggest that parents can effectively deliver high-fidelity coaching to disseminate evidence-based treatment in low-resource settings when given proper training and coaching. Further examination on scalability and sustainment of effects is suggested.
35083922|a|LAY ABSTRACT: During the COVID-19 pandemic, high levels of depression, anxiety and stress have been reported in the general population. However, much less has been reported about the impact of COVID-19 on the mental health of autistic people. What we did: In the present study, we investigated how the mental health of autistic adults in the United Kingdom changed during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. In total, 133 participants completed an online survey at two different time points. Of the 133 participants, 70 completed the survey at the first time point just before the onset of the national lockdown. This allowed us to look at changes in their mental health, from before the lockdown to 10 to 15 weeks during lockdown. All participants (133) told us about their experiences of the pandemic. What we found: While many autistic adults told us that their mental health worsened, people's experience varied. For some autistic adults, aspects of mental health (e.g. anxiety, stress) actually improved. Participants also described social changes that had occurred, at home and in the outside world. They described feelings of uncertainty during the pandemic, and discussed how the pandemic had affected some of their previous coping strategies. Participants also told us about their difficulties in accessing healthcare services and food during the early stages of the pandemic. In our article, we discuss these findings and focus on what needs to change to ensure that autistic people are better supported as the pandemic continues.
35083919|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Children with autism frequently experience co-occurring mental health needs. The "Access to Tailored Autism Integrated Care (ATTAIN)" model was co-created with caregivers, pediatric providers, and health care leaders to identify mental health needs and link to mental health care for autistic children. This article describes outcomes from a pilot study of Access to Tailored Autism Integrated Care with 36 pediatric primary care providers from seven clinics within three healthcare systems. Providers participated in an initial Access to Tailored Autism Integrated Care training and received ongoing online support over 4 months with autistic patients ages 4-16 years old. Survey and interview assessments measured provider perceptions of feasibility, acceptability, and intentions to continue using Access to Tailored Autism Integrated Care after the pilot. Providers reported that Access to Tailored Autism Integrated Care was feasible, acceptable, that the initial training was helpful in their implementation but that more specific and tailored implementation support was needed. Results show that Access to Tailored Autism Integrated Care is a promising model to support mental health screening and linkage for children with autism in primary care. Findings provide information on specific areas of the Access to Tailored Autism Integrated Care model that could be benefit from additional refinement to support more widespread use in primary care settings.
35083605|a|Pivotal Response Treatment (PRT) is considered to be an empirically supported parent-mediated treatment for children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), but research on parental experiences is lacking. This qualitative study examined the perspectives of parents of young children with ASD who participated in a 14-week PRT with parent group training (PRT-PG). Semi-structured interviews (n = 12) were carried out, based on Grounded Theory principles. Results indicated that facilitators and barriers were related to timing and expectations, training setting and characteristics, and participant characteristics. Perceived effects were related to improved child's social-communication skills and well-being, parental insights into their child's needs and own habitual patterns in communication and behavior, and positive changes in family cohesion. The findings indicate that in general parents value PRT-PG as feasible and effective.
35083590|a|Although previous research helped to define differences in intelligence between neurotypicals and those with ASD, results were limited by small sample sizes or restricted subtests. Using data from the NIMH Data Archive, this study examined the intelligence of children with ASD (N = 671). Results demonstrate an average standard deviation of 25.75, which is 1.72 times greater than that of the normative sample for the WISC-III. Moreover, students with ASD are 12 times more likely than the general population of students to score within the intellectual disability range, but are also 1.5 times more likely to score in the superior range, suggesting that more students with ASD should be considered for giftedness. Determining the diversity of intelligence among those with ASD has implications for research, clinical practice, and neurological understanding.
35082728|a|Based on conversations between 10 Chinese children with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) and five therapists in the context of Naturalistic Intervention, this study investigated the therapists' agreement expressions in this typical setting. The study found that (1) the therapists mainly used four agreement strategies: acknowledgment, positive evaluation, repetition and blending. These four strategies could be used individually or in combination. The first three strategies and their combinations were used frequently during the therapeutic conversation. (2) With the major occurrences in the post-expansion position, the agreement expressions in the therapeutic conversation mainly performed three functions, namely, creating a supportive therapeutic relationship, serving as positive reinforcers and implementing interventions pertinent to communication skills. (3) This study proposed that the therapists' preferred use of agreement expressions in the intervention process could be explained by the features of Naturalistic Intervention.
35082710|a|This manuscript explores intersubjectivity through a conceptual construct for meaning-making that emphasizes three major interrelated elements-meaning making in interaction, making meaning with the body as well as the mind, and meaning making within an open dynamic system. These three elements are present in the literature on intersubjectivity with a wide range of terms used to describe various theoretical formulations. One objective of this manuscript is to illustrate how such a construct can be useful to understand the meaning-making observed in psychoanalysis, such as in the treatment of a young child on the autistic spectrum. The challenges in establishing an intersubjective state with a child on the autistic spectrum serve to highlight important features of intersubjectivity. As an important background to this clinical illustration, we illustrate the construct with the scientific paradigm of the well-known face-to-face still-face.
35082596|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a group of heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorders that are highly heritable and are associated with impaired dynamic functional connectivity (DFC). However, the molecular mechanisms behind DFC alterations remain largely unknown. Eighty-eight patients with ASDs and 87 demographically matched typical controls (TCs) from the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange II database were included in this study. A seed-based sliding window approach was then performed to investigate the DFC changes in each of the 29 seeds in 10 classic resting-state functional networks and the whole brain. Subsequently, the relationships between DFC alterations in patients with ASDs and their symptom severity were assessed. Finally, transcription-neuroimaging association analyses were conducted to explore the molecular mechanisms of DFC disruptions in patients with ASDs. Compared with TCs, patients with ASDs showed significantly increased DFC between the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and left fusiform/lingual gyrus, between the DLPFC and the superior temporal gyrus, between the right frontal eye field (FEF) and left middle frontal gyrus, between the FEF and the right angular gyrus, and between the left intraparietal sulcus and the right middle temporal gyrus. Moreover, significant relationships between DFC alterations and symptom severity were observed. Furthermore, the genes associated with DFC changes in ASDs were identified by performing gene-wise across-sample spatial correlation analysis between gene expression extracted from six donors' brain of the Allen Human Brain Atlas and case-control DFC difference. In enrichment analysis, these genes were enriched for processes associated with synaptic signaling and voltage-gated ion channels and calcium pathways; also, these genes were highly expressed in autistic disorder, chronic alcoholic intoxication and several disorders related to depression. These results not only demonstrated higher DFC in patients with ASDs but also provided novel insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying these alterations.
35082310|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by deficits in social communication and interaction as well as the presence of repetitive, restricted patterns of behavior, interests, or activities. Many autistic students experience difficulty with daily functioning at school and home. Given these difficulties, regular school attendance is a primary source for autistic students to receive an appropriate range of needed educational and therapeutic interventions. Moreover, school absenteeism (SA) is associated with negative consequences such as school drop-out. Therefore, early SA prediction would help school districts to intervene properly to ameliorate this issue. Due to its heterogeneity, autistic students show within-group differences concerning their SA. A comprehensive statistical analysis performed by the authors shows that the individual and demographic characteristics of the targeted population are not predictive factors of SA. So, we used the students' recent previous attendance to predict their future attendance. We introduce a deep learning-based framework for predicting short-and long-term SA of autistic students using the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) algorithms. The adopted algorithms outperform other machine learning algorithms. In detail, LSTM increased the accuracy and recall of short-term SA prediction by 20% and 13%, while the same scores of long-term SA prediction increased by 5% using MLP.
35082275|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complex developmental disorder characterized by deficits in social interactions, communication, and stereotypical behaviors. Immune dysfunction is a common co-morbidity seen in ASD, with innate immune activation seen both in the brain and periphery. We previously identified significant differences in peripheral monocyte cytokine responses after stimulation with lipoteichoic acid (LTA) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which activate toll-like receptors (TLR)-2 and 4 respectively. However, an unbiased examination of monocyte gene expression in response to these stimulants had not yet been performed. To identify how TLR activation impacts gene expression in ASD monocytes, we isolated peripheral blood monocytes from 26 children diagnosed with autistic disorder (AD) or pervasive developmental disorder-not otherwise specified (PDDNOS) and 22 typically developing (TD) children and cultured them with LTA or LPS for 24 h, then performed RNA sequencing. Activation of both TLR2 and TLR4 induced expression of immune genes, with a subset that were differentially regulated in AD compared to TD samples. In response to LPS, monocytes from AD children showed a unique increase in KEGG pathways and GO terms that include key immune regulator genes. In contrast, monocytes from TD children showed a consistent decrease in expression of genes associated with translation in response to TLR stimulation. This decrease was not observed in AD or PDDNOS monocytes, suggesting a failure to properly downregulate a prolonged immune response in monocytes from children with ASD. As monocytes are involved in early orchestration of the immune response, our findings will help elucidate the mechanisms regulating immune dysfunction in ASD.
35081728|a|Aim: To detect early-life environmental factors leading to DNA methylation changes of autism spectrum disorder (ASD)-related genes in young ASD females and reveal epigenetic biomarkers of disease severity. Materials & methods: We investigated blood methylation levels of MECP2, OXTR, BDNF, RELN, BCL2, EN2 and HTR1A genes in 42 ASD females. Results: Maternal gestational weight gain correlated with BDNF methylation levels (Bonferroni-corrected p = 0.034), and lack of folic acid supplementation at periconception resulted in higher disease severity in the ASD children (Bonferroni-corrected p = 0.048). RELN methylation levels were inversely correlated with disease severity (Bonferroni corrected p = 0.042). Conclusion: The present study revealed gene-environment interactions and potential epigenetic biomarkers of disease severity in ASD females.
35081333|a|ASD-associated genes are enriched for synaptic proteins and epigenetic regulators. How those chromatin modulators establish ASD traits have remained unknown. We find haploinsufficiency of Ash1l causally induces anxiety and autistic-like behavior, including repetitive behavior, and alters social behavior. Specific depletion of Ash1l in forebrain induces similar ASD-associated behavioral defects. While the learning ability remains intact, the discrimination ability of Ash1l mutant mice is reduced. Mechanistically, deletion of Ash1l in neurons induces excessive synapses due to the synapse pruning deficits, especially during the post-learning period. Dysregulation of synaptic genes is detected in Ash1l mutant brain. Specifically, Eph receptor A7 is downregulated in Ash1l+/- mice through accumulating EZH2-mediated H3K27me3 in its gene body. Importantly, increasing activation of EphA7 in Ash1l+/- mice by supplying its ligand, ephrin-A5, strongly promotes synapse pruning and rescues discrimination deficits. Our results suggest that Ash1l haploinsufficiency is a highly penetrant risk factor for ASD, resulting from synapse pruning deficits.
35080590|a|Importance: Past studies identified rare copy number variants (CNVs) as risk factors for neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), including autism spectrum disorder and schizophrenia. However, the clinical characterization of NDD CNVs is understudied in population cohorts unselected for neuropsychiatric disorders and in cohorts of diverse ancestry. Objective: To identify individuals harboring NDD CNVs in a multiancestry biobank and to query their enrichment for select neuropsychiatric disorders as well as association with multiple medical disorders. Design, Settings, and Participants: In a series of phenotypic enrichment and association analyses, NDD CNVs were clinically characterized among 24 877 participants in the BioMe biobank, an electronic health record-linked biobank derived from the Mount Sinai Health System, New York, New York. Participants were recruited into the biobank since September 2007 across diverse ancestry and medical and neuropsychiatric specialties. For the current analyses, electronic health record data were analyzed from May 2004 through May 2019. Main Outcomes and Measures: NDD CNVs were identified using a consensus of 2 CNV calling algorithms, based on whole-exome sequencing and genotype array data, followed by novel in-silico clinical assessments. Results: Of 24 877 participants, 14 586 (58.7%) were female; self-reported ancestry categories included 5965 (24.0%) who were of African ancestry, 7892 (31.7%) who were of European ancestry, and 8536 (34.3%) who were of Hispanic ancestry; and the mean (SD) age was 50.5 (17.3) years. Among 24 877 individuals, the prevalence of 64 NDD CNVs was 2.5% (n = 627), with prevalence varying by locus, corroborating the presence of some relatively highly prevalent NDD CNVs (eg, 15q11.2 deletion/duplication). An aggregate set of NDD CNVs were enriched for congenital disorders (odds ratio, 2.0; 95% CI, 1.1-3.5; P = .01) and major depressive disorder (odds ratio, 1.5; 95% CI, 1.1-2.0; P = .01). In a meta-analysis of medical diagnoses (n = 195 hierarchically clustered diagnostic codes), NDD CNVs were significantly associated with several medical outcomes, including essential hypertension (z score = 3.6; P = 2.8 x 10-4), kidney failure (z score = 3.3; P = 1.1 x 10-3), and obstructive sleep apnea (z score = 3.4; P = 8.1 x 10-4) and, in another analysis, morbid obesity (z score = 3.8; P = 1.3 x 10-4). Further, NDD CNVs were associated with increased body mass index in a multiancestry analysis (beta = 0.19; 95% CI, 0.10-0.31; P = .003). For 36 common serum tests, there was no association with NDD CNVs. Conclusions and Relevance: Clinical features of individuals harboring NDD CNVs were elucidated in a large-scale, multiancestry biobank, identifying enrichments for congenital disorders and major depressive disorder as well as associations with several medical outcomes, including hypertension, kidney failure, and obesity and obesity-related phenotypes, specifically obstructive sleep apnea and increased body mass index. The association between NDD CNVs and obesity outcomes indicate further potential pleiotropy of NDD CNVs beyond neurodevelopmental outcomes previously reported. Future clinical genetic investigations may lead to insights of at-risk individuals and therapeutic strategies targeting specific genetic variants. The importance of diverse inclusion within biobanks and considering the effect of rare genetic variants in a multiancestry context is evident.
35080154|a|A number of studies have reported diminished attention to the eyes in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). These studies predominantly used static images of faces as stimuli. Recent studies, however, have shown enhanced response to eye contact in typically developing (TD) individuals when they observe a person in a live interaction. We investigated physiological orienting to perceived eye contact in adolescents with ASD and TD adolescents when they observed a person in live interaction or viewed a photograph of the same person's face. We measured heart rate (HR) deceleration as an index of attentional orienting. Adolescents with ASD, as well as TD adolescents, showed significant HR deceleration for the direct gaze compared to an averted gaze in the live condition, but not in the photographic condition. The results suggest an intact response to perceived eye contact in individuals with ASD during a live face-to-face interaction. LAY SUMMARY: Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have a different eye gaze pattern when observing photographic faces. However, little is known about how individuals with ASD process a real person's face. We measured heart rate (HR) and found that adolescents with ASD showed the typical decline in HR when they made eye contact with a real person, which suggests that both groups of individuals directed their attention to eye contact in a live face-to-face interaction.
35079929|a|Difficulties with social interactions and communication that characterize autism persist in adulthood. While social participation in adulthood is often marked by social isolation and limited close friendships, this qualitative study describes the range of social participation activities and community contacts, from acquaintances to close relationships, that contributed to connection from the perspective of 40 autistic adults. Qualitative data from interviews around social and community involvement were analyzed and revealed five main contexts where social participation occurred: vocational contexts, neighborhoods, common interest groups, support services and inclusive environments, and online networks and apps. Implications for practice to support a range of social participation include engaging in newer social networking avenues, as well as traditional paths through employment and support services.
35079448|a|Introduction: There has been a recent rise in public perception that vaccines are unsafe, fostering vaccine hesitancy (VH). Few interventions have focused on teaching medical students' communication skills for counseling vaccine-hesitant patients. Methods: Our educational intervention, designed for medical students, involved a self-study module followed by an interactive session on VH. Students practiced counseling vaccine-hesitant standardized patients (SPs). Faculty and SPs assessed student counseling skills. Students completed pre- and post-intervention surveys to assess attitudes and preparedness to counsel VH patients. Results: Students showed a better ability to talk to parents about Human Papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine concerns and Measles Mumps Rubella (MMR)/autism-related issues than to address patients' concerns related to the Varicella Zoster Virus (VZV) vaccine.Students' surveys pre- and post-intervention revealed significant improvement in their vaccination knowledge and comfort with counseling vaccine-hesitant patients. Student counseling skills as part of an Objective Structured Clinical Exam (OSCE) showed 73% of students asked about immunization and elicited SP concerns, but only 36% counseled appropriately. Conclusions: In the face of emerging VH, physicians play a critical role in advising and influencing vaccination decisions. Therefore, it is a core responsibility of medical educators to train medical students on recommending vaccinations and responding effectively to vaccine-hesitant parents and patients. Our multifaceted interactive session provided preclinical students with knowledge and skills to improve communication skills with VH patients and parents and the need for ongoing practice of these VH counseling skills.
35079123|a|Interest in the cerebellum is expanding given evidence of its contributions to cognition and emotion, and dysfunction in various psychopathologies. However, research into its genetic architecture and shared influences with liability for mental disorders is lacking. We conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of total cerebellar volume and underlying cerebellar lobe volumes in 33,265 UK-Biobank participants. Total cerebellar volume was heritable (h2SNP = 50.6%), showing moderate genetic homogeneity across lobes (h2SNP from 35.4% to 57.1%; mean genetic correlation between lobes rg   0.44). We identified 33 GWAS signals associated with total cerebellar volume, of which 6 are known to alter protein-coding gene structure, while a further five mapped to genomic regions known to alter cerebellar tissue gene expression. Use of summary data-based Mendelian randomisation further prioritised genes whose change in expression appears to mediate the SNP-trait association. In total, we highlight 21 unique genes of greatest interest for follow-up analyses. Using LD-regression, we report significant genetic correlations between total cerebellar volume and brainstem, pallidum and thalamus volumes. While the same approach did not result in significant correlations with psychiatric phenotypes, we report enrichment of schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and autism spectrum disorder associated signals within total cerebellar GWAS results via conditional and conjunctional-FDR analysis. Via these methods and GWAS catalogue, we identify which of our cerebellar genomic regions also associate with psychiatric traits. Our results provide important insights into the common allele architecture of cerebellar volume and its overlap with other brain volumes and psychiatric phenotypes.
35078956|a|Objective: To investigate the possible relationship between relaxin-3 and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Methods: Serum relaxin-3 was measured in 80 children (50 children diagnosed with ASD and 30 controls). Symptom severity in the ASD group was evaluated by the Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS). Behavioral and nutritional problems in the groups were evaluated using the Abnormal Behavior Checklist (ABC) and the Children's Eating Behavior Questionnaire (CEBQ). Results: Our findings showed that serum relaxin-3 levels were higher in children with ASD than in the controls. The listening response sub-scale score of the CARS scale was found to decrease as the level of relaxin-3 increased. However, as relaxin-3 levels increased in children with ASD, it was found that the speech problem sub-scale score on the ABC scale and the desire to drink score on the CEBQ scale increased, but the satiety responsiveness and food fussiness scores decreased. Conclusion: This study the first to investigate serum levels of relaxin-3, which has a role in regulating social behavior and nutritional behavior in children with ASD.
35078834|a|BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic is a challenge for everyone, particularly for children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). ASD is a developmental disorder characterised by limitations in social communication, repetitive behavioural patterns, and limited interests, and activities. It is expected that many families with children with ASD will experience more problems due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the related public health restrictions. At the same time, some may experience improved functioning, due to fewer expectations and social demands. METHODS/DESIGN: In a mixed-method study to identify the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, parents of children with ASD (ages 4-21) who were in care pre-COVID-19 at one of three large mental healthcare institutions in the region of Rotterdam participated (68 for T0, 57 for T1). The aims are (1) to investigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on overall functioning and autistic symptoms of the child/adolescent with ASD, as well as parental and family functioning (QUANT-QUAL), in both the short term and longer term, and (2) to investigate risk and protective factors (in light of resilience) (QUANT-qual) and (3) to investigate care and informational needs (QUAL-quant). Pre-COVID-19 baseline data will be retrieved from clinical records. Participants will fill out two surveys (one during a COVID-19 peak-January-May 2021-and one thereafter). Survey participants were invited to participate in interviews (n=27). Surveys include measures thar were included pre-COVID-19 (ie, overall functioning and autism symptoms) as well as specific measures to identify family functioning and COVID-19 impact. The semistructured interviews focus on child, parent and family functioning and care-and informational needs. ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The Medical Ethics Committee of the Erasmus MC has approved the study. Findings will be available to families of children with ASD, their care providers, the funders, autism societies, the government and other researchers.
35078414|a|BACKGROUND: The concomitant role of the Central Executive, the Saliency and the Social Cognition networks in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in demanding ecological tasks remains unanswered. We addressed this question using a novel task-based fMRI virtual-reality task mimicking a challenging daily-life chore that may present some difficulties to individuals with ASD: the EcoSupermarketX. METHODS: Participants included 29 adolescents: 15 with ASD and 15 with typical neurodevelopment (TD). They performed the EcoSupermarketX (a shopping simulation with three goal-oriented sub-tasks including "no cue", "non-social" or "social" cues), during neuroimaging and eye-tracking. RESULTS: ASD differed from TD only in total time and distance to complete the "social cue" sub-task with matched eye-tracking measures. Neuroimaging revealed simultaneous hyperactivation across social, executive, and saliency circuits in ASD. In contrast, ASD showed reduced activation in the parahippocampal gyrus, involved in scene recognition. CONCLUSIONS: When performing a virtual shopping task matching the performance of controls, ASD adolescents hyperactivate three core networks: executive, saliency and social cognition. Parahippocampal hypoactivation is consistent with effortless eidetic scene processing, in line with the notion of peaks and valleys of neural recruitment in individuals with ASD. These hyperactivation/hypoactivation patterns in daily life tasks provide a circuit-level signature of neural diversity in ASD, a possible intervention target.
35077878|a|
35076832|a|A relatively large number of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) exhibit disruptive behavioral problems. While accumulating data have shown behavioral parent training programs to be efficacious in reducing disruptive behaviors for this population, there is a dearth of literature examining the impact of such programs across the range of ASD severity. To evaluate the effectiveness of Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT), an evidence-based treatment for children with problem behaviors and their families, in reducing disruptive behaviors among children (4-10 years) with ASD (without intellectual disabilities). Fifty-five children (85.5% male, 7.15 years; SD 1.72) were enrolled from pediatric offices and educational settings into a randomized clinical trial (PCIT: N = 30; Control: N = 25). PCIT families demonstrated a significant reduction in child disruptive behaviors, increase in positive parent-child communication, improvement in child compliance, and reduction in parental stress compared to the control group. Exploratory analyses revealed no differential treatment response based on ASD severity, receptive language, and age. Results are promising for the use of PCIT with children demonstrating disruptive behaviors across the autism spectrum.
35076831|a|Using a mixed methods design, this study aimed to examine the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on autistic and non-autistic adults. We conducted an online survey with 196 autistic and 228 non-autistic adults from Belgium, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom focusing on their experiences during the first period of the pandemic. Our results indicate rather diverse experiences within the group of autistic participants across all domains of life. In comparison with non-autistic adults, autistic adults reported less negative impact on their social life and more negative impact on health and support services. In the autism group, stress was mainly related to changing and unclear measures. A wide range of coping strategies were described as helpful in reducing stress during the pandemic.
35076548|a|Background: Increased parental stress is strongly related to the severity of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) symptomatology. Parents' coping strategies and social support issues add to the complexity of this relationship. Aim: The present study investigated the relationship between self-regulation skills and parenting stress in parents of nonverbal children with ASD. Methods and procedure: The Parenting Stress Index-Short Form (PSI-SF) was administered to 75 families, and self-regulation scores on a Motor Behavior Checklist for children (MBC) were recorded by students' class teachers (level of functioning-behavioral problems). In addition, interviews were conducted with a focus group of six parents (four mothers and two fathers) to explore the underline factors of parental stressin-depth. Results: Correlation analyses revealed that parenting stress was positively correlated with elevated scores on MBC children's self-regulation subscale. On the other hand, parenting stress was negatively correlated with the level of social functional support reported. Qualitative data were analyzed using transcripts, revealing additional stressors for families and parents, and resulting in recommendations to overcome these factors. Conclusions and implications: Aiming at developing strategies to improve self-regulation skills in nonverbal children with ASD may be particularly important in reducing parental stress for families having nonverbal children with autism and other developmental disabilities. Parents' stressors and suggestions during interviews are also discussed.
35076347|a|OBJECTIVE: This paper provides clinical guidance supported by the literature on conducting diagnostic evaluations for young children suspected of having autism spectrum disorder (ASD). METHOD: Authors provided a summary of clinical recommendations and evidence-based strategies for providing diagnostic evaluations for young children suspected of having ASD that are supported by the existing literature. RESULTS: ASD is a complex condition that typically presents in the first couple years of a child's life. While many children can be accurately diagnosed by age 2, the majority of children are diagnosed much later. This article provides recommendations for evidence-based clinical practices to support accurate early identification and diagnosis in young children with autism. Recommended practices and measures for screening, comprehensive diagnostic evaluation, and differential diagnosis of ASD in early childhood are discussed. CONCLUSIONS: Early identification of ASD is important to promote improved outcomes related to early intervention. There are a variety of tools and practices available to support neuropsychologists in providing accurate early diagnosis and appropriate developmental monitoring for children suspected of ASD and related neurodevelopmental conditions. There is a need for continued efforts regarding awareness of ASD in early childhood and targeted training in ASD for neuropsychologists and other disciplines who support families of young children with disabilities.
35076326|a|OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to present a set of empirically derived effect size distributions to provide field-based benchmarks for interpreting the observed effects of interventions for young children on the autism spectrum, and for planning future studies. METHOD: We generated effect size distributions and reported quartile values for each by outcome domain, and by boundedness, proximity, and assessment approach using 1552 effect sizes from 144 early childhood autism intervention studies gathered for a previously published meta-analysis. RESULTS: Quartile values represent considerable heterogeneity in effect size distributions across outcome domains, as well as variability as a function of outcome boundedness, proximity, and assessment approach. CONCLUSIONS: Our results serve as field- and outcome-specific benchmarks (e.g., contextual guides for small, medium, and large effects) that will help autism intervention researchers easily incorporate information from relevant prior empirical literature when conducting power analyses to plan for future studies. Benchmarks will also assist researchers seeking to interpret the magnitude of observed effects in clinical trials relative to the broader distribution of intervention effects on similar outcomes. Nuanced discussions that contextualize study findings in light of relevant empirical benchmarks will better assist practitioners in understanding the magnitude and scope of demonstrated change relative to studies with similar outcomes and selecting interventions for clinical practice. We discuss the limitations of these data, our analyses, as well as directions for future work.
35075790|a|Genetic studies implicate disruption to the DLG2 gene in copy number variants as increasing risk for schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorders and intellectual disability. To investigate psychiatric endophenotypes associated with DLG2 haploinsufficiency (and concomitant PSD-93 protein reduction) a novel clinically relevant Dlg2+/- rat was assessed for abnormalities in anxiety, sensorimotor gating, hedonic reactions, social behaviour, and locomotor response to the N-Methyl-D-aspartic acid receptor antagonist phencyclidine. Dlg gene and protein expression were also investigated to assess model validity. Reductions in PSD-93 messenger RNA and protein were observed in the absence of compensation by other related genes or proteins. Behaviourally Dlg2+/- rats show a potentiated locomotor response to phencyclidine, as is typical of psychotic disorder models, in the absence of deficits in the other behavioural phenotypes assessed here. This shows that the behavioural effects of Dlg2 haploinsufficiency may specifically relate to psychosis vulnerability but are subtle, and partially dissimilar to behavioural deficits previously reported in Dlg2+/- mouse models demonstrating issues surrounding the comparison of models with different aetiology and species. Intact performance on many of the behavioural domains assessed here, such as anxiety and reward processing, will remove these as confounds when continuing investigation into this model using more complex cognitive tasks.
35075046|a|OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to identify factors associated with parent-reported problems accessing needed mental health services (MHS) in youth with autism spectrum disorder and anxiety. METHODS: This study is a secondary analysis using the National Survey of Children's Health 2016 to 2017 data sets with multivariable logistic regression. Subjects are 6 to 17 year olds with parent-reported autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and anxiety. Outcome is parent-reported challenge accessing needed mental health treatment, dichotomized to not a problem versus problem. Covariates included race/ethnicity, intellectual disability, insurance, medical home, poverty level, and parent education level. RESULTS: The sample included 568 youth with ASD and anxiety-78% male subjects, mean age 12.5 years, and 63% White, non-Hispanic. Fifty-three percent of youth with ASD and anxiety had parent-reported problems accessing needed MHS. Lack of medical home (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] 5.97, 95% confidence interval [CI] [2.72-13.09]) and coexisting intellectual disability (aOR 2.23, 95% CI [1.08-4.60]) were significantly associated with problems accessing MHS. Reported family incomes at 0% to 99% and 100% to 199% of the federal poverty level as compared with family income at 400% federal poverty level or above (aOR 0.32, 95% CI [0.11-0.94] and aOR 0.35, 95% CI [0.13-0.95], respectively) was associated with decreased problems accessing MHS. CONCLUSION: In this nationally representative study, more than half of youth with ASD and anxiety had parent-reported problems accessing needed MHS. Lack of a medical home, co-occurring intellectual disability, and higher socioeconomic status (SES) are associated with problems accessing MHS. Therefore, policies to support the medical home; increase mental health supports available for those with ASD, anxiety, and coexisting intellectual disability; and support access for all SES levels may increase mental health access.
35074918|a|MeCP2 is associated with Rett syndrome (RTT), MECP2 duplication syndrome, and a number of conditions with isolated features of these diseases, including autism, intellectual disability, and motor dysfunction. MeCP2 is known to broadly bind methylated DNA, but the precise molecular mechanism driving disease pathogenesis remains to be determined. Using proximity-dependent biotinylation (BioID), we identified a transcription factor 20 (TCF20) complex that interacts with MeCP2 at the chromatin interface. Importantly, RTT-causing mutations in MECP2 disrupt this interaction. TCF20 and MeCP2 are highly coexpressed in neurons and coregulate the expression of key neuronal genes. Reducing Tcf20 partially rescued the behavioral deficits caused by MECP2 overexpression, demonstrating a functional relationship between MeCP2 and TCF20 in MECP2 duplication syndrome pathogenesis. We identified a patient exhibiting RTT-like neurological features with a missense mutation in the PHF14 subunit of the TCF20 complex that abolishes the MeCP2-PHF14-TCF20 interaction. Our data demonstrate the critical role of the MeCP2-TCF20 complex for brain function.
35074487|a|
35073995|a|We consider an increasingly popular study design where single-cell RNA-seq data are collected from multiple individuals and the question of interest is to find genes that are differentially expressed between two groups of individuals. Towards this end, we propose a statistical method named IDEAS (individual level differential expression analysis for scRNA-seq). For each gene, IDEAS summarizes its expression in each individual by a distribution and then assesses whether these individual-specific distributions are different between two groups of individuals. We apply IDEAS to assess gene expression differences of autism patients versus controls and COVID-19 patients with mild versus severe symptoms.
35073843|a|BACKGROUND: Elucidating the modes of action (MoAs) of drugs and drug candidate compounds is critical for guiding translation from drug discovery to clinical application. Despite the development of several data-driven approaches for predicting chemical-disease associations, the molecular cues that organize the epigenetic landscape of drug responses remain poorly understood. RESULTS: With the use of a computational method, we attempted to elucidate the epigenetic landscape of drug responses, in terms of transcription factors (TFs), through large-scale ChIP-seq data analyses. In the algorithm, we systematically identified TFs that regulate the expression of chemically induced genes by integrating transcriptome data from chemical induction experiments and almost all publicly available ChIP-seq data (consisting of 13,558 experiments). By relating the resultant chemical-TF associations to a repository of associated proteins for a wide range of diseases, we made a comprehensive prediction of chemical-TF-disease associations, which could then be used to account for drug MoAs. Using this approach, we predicted that: (1) cisplatin promotes the anti-tumor activity of TP53 family members but suppresses the cancer-inducing function of MYCs; (2) inhibition of RELA and E2F1 is pivotal for leflunomide to exhibit antiproliferative activity; and (3) CHD8 mediates valproic acid-induced autism. CONCLUSIONS: Our proposed approach has the potential to elucidate the MoAs for both approved drugs and candidate compounds from an epigenetic perspective, thereby revealing new therapeutic targets, and to guide the discovery of unexpected therapeutic effects, side effects, and novel targets and actions.
35072847|a|Many studies have shown low birth weight is associated with psychopathology later in life, particularly attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The association is well-replicated, independent from a variety of potential familial confounds, and follows a dose-response curve (decreasing birth weight linked with increasing odds of disorder). However, the specificity of the association to attention problems is called into question by the extent of comorbidity in ADHD, and recent findings that the association is stronger for autism than ADHD. We test the relative dose-response strength of birth weight on multiple aspects of behavior to explore specificity of the effect to attention problems. We also test recent suggestions that the association between birth weight and attention problems is driven by males. Our sample consisted of 9,076 children aged 9-10 from the United States (Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development study). Outcomes included 9 problem-scales and the total problems scale from the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL). Attention problems were the most strongly associated with birth weight after controlling for gestational age, potential familial confounds, and multiple testing, supporting the outcome-specificity of this association. Contrary to recent registry-based findings, an association between birth weight and an autism scale was not observed. Sex moderated the effect of birth weight on total problems, attention problems and aggressive behavior such that these inverse associations were strongly driven by males. Our findings have strong implications for sex-specific prediction and etiological models of childhood psychopathology.
35072578|a|OBJECTIVE: Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is an effective treatment for anxiety in youth with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, research has yet to examine what cognitive characteristics may influence treatment response. The current study investigated decision-making ability and social cognition as potential (a) predictors of differential treatment response to two versions of CBT and (b) moderators of the effect of treatment condition. METHOD: The study included 148 children (mean age = 9.8 years) with interfering anxiety and a diagnosis of ASD who were enrolled in a randomized clinical trial comparing two versions of CBT for anxiety (standard and adapted for ASD). Participants completed pretreatment measures of decision-making ability (adapted Iowa Gambling Task) and social cognition (Strange Stories) and analyses tested whether task performance predicted treatment response across and between (moderation) treatment conditions. RESULTS: Our findings indicate that decision-making ability moderated treatment outcomes in youth with ASD and anxiety, with a better decision-making performance being associated with higher post-treatment anxiety scores for those who received standard, not adapted, CBT. CONCLUSIONS: Children with ASD and anxiety who are more sensitive to reward contingencies and reinforcement may benefit more from adapted CBT approaches that work more explicitly with reward.
35072136|a|The Global Alliance for Genomics and Health (GA4GH) aims to accelerate biomedical advances by enabling the responsible sharing of clinical and genomic data through both harmonized data aggregation and federated approaches. The decreasing cost of genomic sequencing (along with other genome-wide molecular assays) and increasing evidence of its clinical utility will soon drive the generation of sequence data from tens of millions of humans, with increasing levels of diversity. In this perspective, we present the GA4GH strategies for addressing the major challenges of this data revolution. We describe the GA4GH organization, which is fueled by the development efforts of eight Work Streams and informed by the needs of 24 Driver Projects and other key stakeholders. We present the GA4GH suite of secure, interoperable technical standards and policy frameworks and review the current status of standards, their relevance to key domains of research and clinical care, and future plans of GA4GH. Broad international participation in building, adopting, and deploying GA4GH standards and frameworks will catalyze an unprecedented effort in data sharing that will be critical to advancing genomic medicine and ensuring that all populations can access its benefits.
35071743|a|Objectives: Behavioral safety programs have been effective in decreasing injuries across a number of industries. The COVID-19 pandemic is placing stress on the human services field-an industry already noted for its high injury rate. As most organizations resume full operation in the midst of the pandemic, procedures to mitigate the risk of virus transmission are vital. The current manuscript describes the use of a behavioral safety program and its effects on COVID-19 transmission in a school serving setting. Methods: This case study consisted of implementing an organization-wide behavioral safety program in a private school that served students diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. During the course of the study, 124 to 128 direct care staff were employed by the school and served 168 students during the COVID-19 pandemic. Results: During the behavioral safety program, there were a variable but continuous number of safety observations. The percent of safe behavior in the classrooms began near 90% and approached 100% at the conclusion of data collection. During the study there were no documented COVID-19 infections traced to the school. Conclusions: Behavioral safety programs could be effective in promoting behavior associated with minimizing virus transmission; therefore, these programs may also have utility in preventing communicable diseases in human service settings.
35071121|a|Introduction: Access in France to early diagnosis and care for the most severe, but infrequent, Neurodevelopmental Disorders (NDD), autism spectrum disorder and global developmental delay, in children aged 0-7 was improved through measures implemented in 2019. However, there are no such measures for specific learning disorders (SLD), attention, motricity and language disorders (SLDD), despite their annual incidence of between 5 and 8%. Method: We describe the design of a new type of organization and financing of care for SLDD including evaluation procedure, as well as other factors, mainly at the prevention level that will contribute to local and national policy for this frequent health problem. This in response to a national call for projects, commonly called Article 51, targeted innovation in healthcare delivery and funding in the context of medium-term national reform. This provides project stakeholders with the opportunity to set up and implement "bottom-up" projects, mainly using local professionals. A joint initiative by the regional Health Authorities of the Occitanie region, the French Social Security system and a non-profit Association (Occitadys) proposed an experimental new structure of NDD care and funding. Discussion: We here discuss the design of this experiment that aims, over two to three years, to alleviate families' financial burden of care and establish a regional three-tier care system with respect to evaluation, re-education and rehabilitation care. Our approach may benefit SLDD health-care planning, and addresses the questions of prevention, early detection and care-design for families, taking local and socioeconomic disparities into account.
35070938|a|Exposure to metal arsenic (As) has been proposed as a risk factor for autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), which are neurodevelopmental disorders with worldwide increasing in its incidence. In the present study, BTBR T + tf/J (BTBR) mice with ASD-like behavioral characteristics and control highly social FVB mice were orally exposed to 0.1 mM arsenic(III)oxide for 4 weeks, and were compared to investigate neuroimmunological or behavioral abnormalities. IgG1:IgG2a ratios in brain tissues from BTBR mice exposed to As (BTBR-As) were significantly higher than those of BTBR-control mice (BTBR-C), but this change did not occur in FVB mice exposed to As. Levels of IL-4, IFN-gamma, IL-1beta, IL-17, and TNF-alpha in brain tissue were lowered in BTBR-As relative to BTBR-C, but this tendency was not observed with FVB mice. BTBR-As mice demonstrated decrease in relative travel distance and time spent in the center vs. the periphery of open field arena compared to BTBR-C. Sociability evaluation using three-way chamber test did not clearly demonstrate As-mediated alteration in social interaction in BTBR mice. These findings suggest the potential for As-driven predominant TH2-like reactivity profile in the brain microenvironment of BTBR mice and for As-mediated locomotive impairment probably associated with ASD.
35070826|a|Background: HNF1B deletion/intragenic mutations are the most commonly identified genetic cause of congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) suggested by fetal ultrasound findings such as: parenchymal hyperechogenicity, overt cystic changes or gross morphological urinary system (UT) abnormalities. The postnatal evolution of these 17q12 deletions encompassing the HNF1B gene-associated findings has not been assessed in depth. Methods: In this observational study, we present postnatal follow-up findings in 5 of 6 cases (one pregnancy was terminated on parental request) of fetal-onset cystic/hyperechogenic kidneys eventually diagnosed with 17q12 microdeletion encompassing the HNF1B gene between 2009 and 2017. Results: Complete normalization of kidney parenchymal abnormalities and of depressed neonatal renal function was observed in 4/5 and 5/5 patients within 2-4.9 years and 1.5-8 months, respectively. All 5 patients had preserved normal renal function at 3-11 years of follow-up. The evolving later-onset renal features included: hypomagnesemia, hyperuricemia, urinary tract infection (UTI), and bilateral grade 3-4 vesicoureteral reflux and bladder diverticula in 3, 3, 2, and 1 patient, respectively. HNF1B gene deletion-associated extra-renal manifestations with delayed presentation were global developmental delay/autistic spectrum disorder (ASD), rolandic-type seizures, overweight, and borderline fasting hyperglycemia observed in 1-2 patients each. Family history was positive for small-size or asymptomatic cystic kidneys with normal function, diabetes mellitus, seizures, and mental/psychiatric problems in 3/6 cases. Conclusions: Fetal-onset HNF1B deletion-associated kidneys' parenchymal abnormalities confirmed postnatally with initially depressed renal function might undergo complete resolution within several years and few months, respectively. However, later-onset urinary tract, metabolic, and neurodevelopmental features of this mutation might appear over years. Therefore, genetic molecular evaluation/diagnosis and continuous follow-up for evolving features are mandatory in affected children.
35070773|a|Autism is a neurodevelopmental condition with associated difficulties that present differently across individuals. One such difficulty is recognizing basic and complex facial expressions. Research has previously found that there are many evidence-based support programs available for building non-verbal communication skills. These programs are frequently administered with a therapist or in a group setting, making them inflexible in nature. Programs hosted on e-technology are becoming increasingly popular, with many parents supportive of them. Applications (apps) that are hosted on technology such as iPads or mobile phones allow users to engage in building skills in real-time social settings and own what they are learning. These technologies are frequently used by autistic children, with apps typically focusing on identifying facial features. Yet at this current time, there are mixed reviews of how to design such programs and what their theoretical backing is, with many studies using a mix of observation and psychological assessments as outcome measures. Eye-tracking and electroencephalography are established methodologies that measure neural processing and gaze behaviors while viewing faces. To better support the field moving forward, objective measures such as these are a way to measure outcomes of apps that are designed for helping children on the spectrum build skills in understanding facial expressions.
35070443|a|It is proposed that gluten- and casein-rich diets (GRD and CRD) can synergistically exacerbate dysbiosis as comorbidity in autism by worsening leaky gut that affects the brain through the gut-brain axis. In this study, 35 young male rats were divided into 7 groups, Group 1 serves as control; Group 2, clindamycin (CL)-treated; and Group 3, propionic acid (PPA)-induced rodent model of autism. These three groups were fed standard diet until the end of the experiment. Groups 4-7 are rats treated similarly with CL and PPA, then fed on CRD or GRD until the end of the experiment. Serum zonulin, glutathione (GSH), lipid peroxides, and gut microbial composition were measured in the seven studied groups. Data demonstrate the significant increase in serum zonulin as marker of leaky gut in the CL-treated groups fed on CRD or GRD. Lipid peroxides were significantly higher in the serum of GRD-fed rats compared to CRD-fed or normal diet-fed rats. GSH was much lower in CL-treated groups fed on CRD or GRD compared to PPA-treated rats fed on both diets. Both diets differentially affected the diversity of the gut microbiota. This study demonstrates that CRD and GRD exacerbates leaky gut, according to serum zonulin, which was used as marker for increased gut permeability.
35069709|a|
35069339|a|This study explores the emergence and productivity of word order usage in Mandarin-speaking typically-developing (TD) children and children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and examines how this emergence relates to frequency of use in caregiver input. Forty-two caregiver-child dyads participated in video-recorded 30-min semi-structured play sessions. Eleven children with ASD were matched with 10 20-month-old TD children and another 11 children with ASD were matched with 10 26-month-old TD children, on expressive language. We report four major findings: (1) Preschool Mandarin-speaking children with ASD produced word order structures with pervasive ellipsis at similar rates to language-matched TD children, but also displayed differences from TD children in their usage of SVt and VtO frames; (2) Grammatical productivity was observed in both TD children and children with ASD; moreover, children with ASD with higher expressive language produced less stereotyped language; (3) Both TD children and children with ASD heard a range of word orders in their caregivers' input, with TD children's input greater in amount and complexity; however, caregivers of both groups also showed no age/language-related changes in word order usage; (4) Few word-order-specific correlations emerged between caregivers and their children; however, strong correlations were observed for mean length of utterances (MLU) for both groups: Caregivers who produced longer/more complex utterances had children who did the same. Taken together, it seems that despite their pragmatic deficits, the early grammatical knowledge of word order in Mandarin-exposed children with ASD is well preserved and in general follows the typical developmental pattern. Moreover, caregiver input is broadly rather than finely tuned to the linguistic development of TD children and children with ASD, and plays a more important role in children's general syntactic development than in specific word order acquisition. Thus, early word order usage in preschool Mandarin-speaking TD children and children with ASD may be influenced by both caregiver input and child abilities.
35069288|a|In the present study, we examined how an initial being imitated (BIm) strategy affected the development of initiating joint attention (IJA) among a group of children newly diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). One group received 3 months of BIm followed by 12 months of intensive behavior treatment (IBT) which equaled treatment as usual whereas a second group received IBT for the entire 15-month study period. We utilized two measures of IJA: an eye gaze and a gesture score (point and show). IJA did not change during the first 3 months of treatment, nor were any significant between-group differences noted. However, at the end of the 15-month-long intervention period, the BIm group used eye gaze significantly more often to initiate joint attention. No significant change was noted for the gesture score. These results suggest that an early implementation of a being imitated strategy might be useful as less resource intensive but beneficial "start-up" intervention when combined with IBT treatment as a follow-up.
35069156|a|Difficulty engaging in reciprocal social interactions is a core characteristic of autism spectrum disorder. The mechanisms supporting effective dynamic real-time social exchanges are not yet well understood. This proof-of-concept hyperscanning electroencephalography study examined neural synchrony as the mechanism supporting interpersonal social interaction in 34 adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (50% female), age 10-16 years, paired with neurotypical confederates of similar age. The degree of brain-to-brain neural synchrony was quantified at temporo-parietal scalp locations as the circular correlation of oscillatory amplitudes in theta, alpha, and beta frequency bands while the participants engaged in a friendly conversation. In line with the hypotheses, interpersonal neural synchrony was significantly greater during the social interaction compared to the baseline. Lower levels of synchrony were associated with increased behavioral symptoms of social difficulties. With regard to sex differences, we found evidence for stronger interpersonal neural synchrony during conversation than baseline in females with autism, but not in male participants, for whom such condition differences did not reach statistical significance. This study established the feasibility of hyperscanning during real-time social interactions as an informative approach to examine social competence in autism, demonstrated that neural coordination of activity between the interacting brains may contribute to social behavior, and offered new insights into sex-related variability in social functioning in individuals with autism spectrum disorders.
35069123|a|Neuronal hyperexcitability in the central auditory pathway linked to reduced inhibitory activity is associated with numerous forms of hearing loss, including noise damage, age-dependent hearing loss, and deafness, as well as tinnitus or auditory processing deficits in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). In most cases, the reduced central inhibitory activity and the accompanying hyperexcitability are interpreted as an active compensatory response to the absence of synaptic activity, linked to increased central neural gain control (increased output activity relative to reduced input). We here suggest that hyperexcitability also could be related to an immaturity or impairment of tonic inhibitory strength that typically develops in an activity-dependent process in the ascending auditory pathway with auditory experience. In these cases, high-SR auditory nerve fibers, which are critical for the shortest latencies and lowest sound thresholds, may have either not matured (possibly in congenital deafness or autism) or are dysfunctional (possibly after sudden, stressful auditory trauma or age-dependent hearing loss linked with cognitive decline). Fast auditory processing deficits can occur despite maintained basal hearing. In that case, tonic inhibitory strength is reduced in ascending auditory nuclei, and fast inhibitory parvalbumin positive interneuron (PV-IN) dendrites are diminished in auditory and frontal brain regions. This leads to deficits in central neural gain control linked to hippocampal LTP/LTD deficiencies, cognitive deficits, and unbalanced extra-hypothalamic stress control. Under these conditions, a diminished inhibitory strength may weaken local neuronal coupling to homeostatic vascular responses required for the metabolic support of auditory adjustment processes. We emphasize the need to distinguish these two states of excitatory/inhibitory imbalance in hearing disorders: (i) Under conditions of preserved fast auditory processing and sustained tonic inhibitory strength, an excitatory/inhibitory imbalance following auditory deprivation can maintain precise hearing through a memory linked, transient disinhibition that leads to enhanced spiking fidelity (central neural gain ) (ii) Under conditions of critically diminished fast auditory processing and reduced tonic inhibitory strength, hyperexcitability can be part of an increased synchronization over a broader frequency range, linked to reduced spiking reliability (central neural gain ). This latter stage mutually reinforces diminished metabolic support for auditory adjustment processes, increasing the risks for canonical dementia syndromes.
35069112|a|Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) is a leading inherited cause of autism and intellectual disability, resulting from a mutation in the FMR1 gene and subsequent loss of its protein product FMRP. Despite this simple genetic origin, FXS is a phenotypically complex disorder with a range of physical and neurocognitive disruptions. While numerous molecular and cellular pathways are affected by FMRP loss, there is growing evidence that circuit hyperexcitability may be a common convergence point that can account for many of the wide-ranging phenotypes seen in FXS. The mechanisms for hyperexcitability in FXS include alterations to excitatory synaptic function and connectivity, reduced inhibitory neuron activity, as well as changes to ion channel expression and conductance. However, understanding the impact of FMR1 mutation on circuit function is complicated by the inherent plasticity in neural circuits, which display an array of homeostatic mechanisms to maintain activity near set levels. FMRP is also an important regulator of activity-dependent plasticity in the brain, meaning that dysregulated plasticity can be both a cause and consequence of hyperexcitable networks in FXS. This makes it difficult to separate the direct effects of FMR1 mutation from the myriad and pleiotropic compensatory changes associated with it, both of which are likely to contribute to FXS pathophysiology. Here we will: (1) review evidence for hyperexcitability and homeostatic plasticity phenotypes in FXS models, focusing on similarities/differences across brain regions, cell-types, and developmental time points; (2) examine how excitability and plasticity disruptions interact with each other to ultimately contribute to circuit dysfunction in FXS; and (3) discuss how these synaptic and circuit deficits contribute to disease-relevant behavioral phenotypes like epilepsy and sensory hypersensitivity. Through this discussion of where the current field stands, we aim to introduce perspectives moving forward in FXS research.
35069108|a|The cerebral cortex is a structure that underlies various brain functions, including cognition and language. Mammalian cerebral cortex starts developing during the embryonic period with the neural progenitor cells generating neurons. Newborn neurons migrate along progenitors' radial processes from the site of their origin in the germinal zones to the cortical plate, where they mature and integrate in the forming circuitry. Cell biological features of neural progenitors, such as the location and timing of their mitoses, together with their characteristic morphologies, can directly or indirectly regulate the abundance and the identity of their neuronal progeny. Alterations in the complex and delicate process of cerebral cortex development can lead to malformations of cortical development (MCDs). They include various structural abnormalities that affect the size, thickness and/or folding pattern of the developing cortex. Their clinical manifestations can entail a neurodevelopmental disorder, such as epilepsy, developmental delay, intellectual disability, or autism spectrum disorder. The recent advancements of molecular and neuroimaging techniques, along with the development of appropriate in vitro and in vivo model systems, have enabled the assessment of the genetic and environmental causes of MCDs. Here we broadly review the cell biological characteristics of neural progenitor cells and focus on those features whose perturbations have been linked to MCDs.
35068893|a|The burden of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in Saudi Arabia remains unclear with a dearth of literature, which focus on risk factors, prevalence, or interventions. This study is a review of the published literature related to dental experiences of children with ASD in Saudi Arabia. Twenty-two studies were included in this review, based on the predefined inclusion criteria which examined dental disease prevalence in children with ASD, identified the risk factors and the potential barriers to oral care. Results uncovered a lack of systematically published studies from Saudi Arabia which might have led to the limited development of effective oral health policies in the Kingdom. Identification of research gaps and potential intervention policies are needed to improve the oral health and quality of life of children with ASD in Saudi Arabia.
35068190|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Researchers who study autism-related interventions do a poor job reporting data related to the race and ethnicity of autistic individuals who participate in their studies, and of those who do report these data, the participants are overwhelmingly White. This is problematic for many reasons, as we know little about how interventions are meeting the needs of culturally and linguistically diverse populations, and we assume that interventions are effective for all when they have been developed and validated primarily with and for White children. This study examined the reporting patterns of autism intervention researchers whose work was included in a large-scale systematic review of the intervention literature published between 1990 and 2017. We found that only 25% of studies (out of 1,013 included in the review) included data related to the race and ethnicity of their participants, with minimal change in reporting patterns across the years. In studies with reported data, White participants had the highest rate of participation, with a large gap between the next highest rates of participation among Hispanic/Latino, Black, and Asian participants. Other race and ethnicity groups had very low representation. This study includes additional analyses which examine how the reporting patterns and the inclusion of racially and ethnically diverse participants varies across study types, interventions, and outcome areas. Reporting this data is merely a starting point to begin to address the many disparities in autism-related healthcare, education, and research practices, and this article includes broader implications and next steps to ensure the field becomes more equitable and inclusive.
35068188|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Autistic young people are often misunderstood by non-autistic young people, and this can lead to difficulties in their friendships. We know that friendship is very important for our mental health. For non-autistic young people, having good friendships is linked to better mental health and having problems in friendship can cause mental health problems. This study aimed to compare the positive and negative features of friendship that autistic non-autistic young people experience. The study also aimed to understand if having positive or negative friendship features is related to signs of mental health problems (anxiety and depression). 306 young people aged 9-16 took part in this study. These were 86 autistic boys, 18 autistic girls, 91 non-autistic boys and 111 non-autistic girls. The findings of this study showed that autistic young people have less positive friendship features than non-autistic young people. For all young people in the study, having more positive friendship features was related to fewer signs of depression, while having more negative friendship features was related to more signs of depression. Just for autistic girls, having more positive friendship features was related to more signs of anxiety. These findings show that support is needed to help autistic young people have more positive friendships. For example, by teaching non-autistic young people how to be supportive friends to their autistic peers.
35068176|a|LAY ABSTRACT: The stressors autistic individuals encounter and experience as traumatic may vary from those not on the spectrum and typically measured. We conducted in-depth interviews with autistic adults and caregivers of children and adults on the spectrum to identify potential sources of trauma for autistic individuals and evaluate the ability of a standard trauma measure to capture those experiences. Fourteen autistic adults and 15 caregivers with varied backgrounds, clinical profiles, and histories of adversity were interviewed. Participants also completed standard measures of autism, traumatic exposures, and stress. Interviews were analyzed to record both traditional sources of trauma, for comparison with the standard measure, and distinct sources, described as traumatic only in the narratives of participants. Participants described varied experiences as traumatic. Whereas some reflected traditional traumas (e.g. maltreatment) and forms of social marginalization, others reflected conflicts between autistic characteristics and the environment (e.g. sensory trauma). All adults and most caregivers described sources of trauma in interviews not reported on the standard measure. Results have implications for assessing traumatic events in autism and for understanding their contribution to the mental health of this group.
35067719|a|Although intranasal oxytocin is expected to be a novel therapy for the core symptoms of autism spectrum disorder, which has currently no approved medication, the efficacy of repeated administrations was inconsistent, suggesting that the optimal dose for a single administration of oxytocin is not optimal for repeated administration. The current double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre, crossover trial (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03466671) was aimed to test the effect of TTA-121, a new formulation of intranasal oxytocin spray with an enhanced bioavailability (3.6 times higher than Syntocinon  spray, as assessed by area under the concentration-time curve in rabbit brains), which enabled us to test a wide range of multiple doses, on autism spectrum disorder core symptoms and to determine the dose-response relationship. Four-week administrations of TTA-121, at low dose once per day (3 U/day), low dose twice per day (6 U/day), high dose once per day (10 U/day), or high dose twice per day (20 U/day), and 4-week placebo were administered in a crossover manner. The primary outcome was the mean difference in the reciprocity score (range: 0-14, higher values represent worse outcomes) on the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule between the baseline and end point of each administration period. This trial with two administration periods and eight groups was conducted at seven university hospitals in Japan, enrolling adult males with high-functioning autism spectrum disorder. Enrolment began from June 2018 and ended December 2019. Follow-up ended March 2020. Of 109 males with high-functioning autism spectrum disorder who were randomized, 103 completed the trial. The smallest P-value, judged as the dose-response relationship, was the contrast with the peak at TTA-121 6 U/day, with inverted U-shape for both the full analysis set (P = 0.182) and per protocol set (P = 0.073). The Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule reciprocity score, the primary outcome, was reduced in the TTA-121 6 U/day administration period compared with the placebo (full analysis set: P = 0.118, mean difference = -0.5; 95% CI: -1.1 to 0.1; per protocol set: P = 0.012, mean difference = -0.8; 95% CI: -1.3 to -0.2). The per protocol set was the analysis target population, consisting of all full analysis set participants except those who deviated from the protocol. Most dropouts from the full analysis set to the per protocol set occurred because of poor adherence to the test drug (9 of 12 in the first period and 8 of 15 in the second period). None of the secondary clinical and behavioural outcomes were significantly improved with the TTA-121 compared with the placebo in the full analysis set. A novel intranasal spray of oxytocin with enhanced bioavailability enabled us to test a wide range of multiple doses, revealing an inverted U-shape dose-response curve, with the peak at a dose that was lower than expected from previous studies. The efficacy of TTA-121 shown in the current exploratory study should be verified in a future large-scale, parallel-group trial.
35067249|a|
35067243|a|Many mental disorders are linked to personality, but this is rarely recognised in clinical practice. It is suggested here that when the links are very close, the two can be joined. Galenic syndromes are so named because Galen was the first physician to recognise the links between personality and disease.
35066446|a|PURPOSE: Recently, functional brain networks (FBN) have been used for the classification of neurological disorders, such as Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD). Neurological disorder diagnosis with FBN is a challenging task due to the high heterogeneity in subjects and the noise correlations in brain networks. Meanwhile, it is challenging for the existing deep learning models to provide interpretable insights into the brain network. We propose a machine learning approach for the classification of neurological disorders while providing an interpretable framework. METHOD: In this paper, we build upon graph neural network in order to learn effective representations for brain networks in an end-to-end fashion. Specifically, we present a prior brain structure learning-guided multi-view graph convolutional neural network (MVS-GCN), which collaborates the graph structure learning and multi-task graph embedding learning to improve the classification performance and identify the potential functional subnetworks. RESULTS: To demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, we evaluate the performance of the proposed method on the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE) dataset and Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset. The experimental results indicate that our MVS-GCN can achieve enhanced performance compared with state-of-the-art methods. Notably, MVS-GCN achieves an average accuracy/AUC of 69.38%/69.01% on the ABIDE dataset. Moreover, the obtained results from our model show high consistency with the previous neuroimaging derived evidence of within and between-networks biomarkers for ASD. The discovered subnetworks are used as evidence for the proposed MVS-GCN model. CONCLUSION: The proposed MVS-GCN method performs a graph embedding learning from the multi-views graph embedding learning perspective while considering eliminating the heterogeneity in brain networks and enhancing the feature representation of functional subnetworks, which can capture the essential embeddings to improve the classification performance of brain disorder diagnosis. The code is available at https://github.com/GuangqiWen/MVS-GCN.
35065713|a|Sex hormones exert a profound influence on gendered behaviors. How individual sex hormone-responsive neuronal populations regulate diverse sex-typical behaviors is unclear. We performed orthogonal, genetically targeted sequencing of four estrogen receptor 1-expressing (Esr1+) populations and identified 1,415 genes expressed differentially between sexes or estrous states. Unique subsets of these genes were distributed across all 137 transcriptomically defined Esr1+ cell types, including estrous stage-specific ones, that comprise the four populations. We used differentially expressed genes labeling single Esr1+ cell types as entry points to functionally characterize two such cell types, BNSTprTac1/Esr1 and VMHvlCckar/Esr1. We observed that these two cell types, but not the other Esr1+ cell types in these populations, are essential for sex recognition in males and mating in females, respectively. Furthermore, VMHvlCckar/Esr1 cell type projections are distinct from those of other VMHvlEsr1 cell types. Together, projection and functional specialization of dimorphic cell types enables sex hormone-responsive populations to regulate diverse social behaviors.
35064874|a|Given long waitlists for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) evaluation coupled with the COVID-19 pandemic, it is crucial to triage patients to services they are likely to receive diagnostic clarity (i.e., virtual, in-person evaluation). Participants attended a virtual ASD assessment. A subset also attended in-person evaluation. Results suggest younger children with educational services for ASD may benefit from virtual assessment while older patients with a history of psychiatric conditions may benefit from in-person evaluation. An ASD symptom severity tool related to virtual and in-person diagnostic clarity. Family history of ASD related to in-person diagnosis while other variables (e.g., age, educational services) did not. The study suggests patient characteristics may be used to determine for whom virtual ASD assessment may be appropriate.
35064873|a|Previous psychophysical studies reported a positive aftereffect in tactile temporal order judgments, which can be explained by the Bayesian estimation model ('Bayesian calibration'). We investigated the relationship between Bayesian calibration and autistic traits in participants with typical development (TD) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Bayesian calibration was weakened in TD participants with high autistic traits, consistent with the 'hypo-priors' hypothesis for autistic perceptions. The results from the ASD group were generally observed as a continuation of those from the TD groups. Meanwhile, two ASD participants showed irregularly large positive or negative aftereffects. We discussed the mechanisms behind the general results among TD and ASD participants and two particular results among ASD participants based on the Bayesian estimation model.
35064837|a|PURPOSE: The effects of electromagnetic fields of mobile phones on headaches have attracted researchers during the last decades. However, contradictory results have been reported so far. METHODS: In this systematic review and meta-analysis, major databases including PubMed, Scopus and Web of Science were searched using suitable search terms and PRISMA guidelines to retrieve eligible studies for the effect of mobile phone use on headache. After the abstract and full-text screening, 33 studies were retrieved and the effect size in terms of odds ratio (OR) was extracted. Between-study heterogeneity was assessed using I2 statistic and Q test, while publication bias was evaluated by funnel plot and Egger's and Begg's tests. RESULTS: Among 33 eligible studies, 30 eligible studies were included in the meta-analysis. When considering all studies, the pooled effect size of OR = 1.30(95% CI 1.21-1.39) was obtained, while the heterogeneity between studies was significant. Subgroup analyses by considering the age of participants and EMF exposure duration were performed to find the source of heterogeneity. The odds ratios when the age of participants was the variable were 1.33 (95% CI 1.14-1.53) and 1.29 (95% CI 1.20-1.37), for ages > 18 and age <= 18 years, respectively. When EMF exposure duration was considered, subgroup analysis obtained the pooled effect size of OR = 1.41(95% CI 1.22-1.61) and 1.23(95% CI 1.12-1.34), for EMF exposure duration > 100 and <= 100 minutes per week, respectively. The pooled effect sizes emphasized the effect of mobile phone use on headaches for all ages and exposure durations. CONCLUSION: Results revealed that age and exposure duration (mainly call duration), both were the source of heterogeneity between studies. Furthermore, results showed that increasing call duration and mobile phone use in older individuals increased the risk of headache.
35064798|a|RATIONALE: Infants born prematurely risk developing diffuse white matter injury (WMI), which is associated with impaired cognitive functioning and an increased risk of autism spectrum disorder. Recently, our rat model of preterm diffuse WMI induced by combined fetal inflammation and postnatal hypoxia showed impaired motor performance, anxiety-like behaviour and autism-like behaviour in juvenile rats, especially males. Immunohistochemistry showed delayed myelination in the sensory cortex and impaired oligodendrocyte differentiation. OBJECTIVE: To assess long-term cognitive deficits in this double-hit rat model of diffuse WMI, animals were screened on impulsivity, attention and cognitive flexibility in adulthood using the 5-choice serial reaction time task (5CSRTT) and a probabilistic reversal learning task, tests that require a proper functioning prefrontal cortex. Thereafter, myelination deficits were evaluated by immunofluorescent staining in adulthood. RESULTS: Overall, little effect of WMI or sex was found in the cognitive tasks. WMI animals showed subtle differences in performance in the 5CSRTT. Manipulating 5CSRTT parameters resulted in performance patterns previously seen in the literature. Sex differences were found in perseverative responses and omitted trials: female WMI rats seem to be less flexible in the 5CSRTT but not in the reversal learning task. Males collected rewards faster in the probabilistic reversal learning task. These findings are explained by temporally rather than permanently affected myelination and by the absence of extensive injury to prefrontal cortical subregions, confirmed by immunofluorescent staining in both adolescence and adulthood. CONCLUSION: This rat model of preterm WMI does not lead to long-term cognitive deficits as observed in prematurely born human infants.
35064790|a|PURPOSE: EGOS is an epidemiological obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) cohort in Sweden. Individuals contributed DNA for genotyping and sequencing and completed a Swedish translation of the Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory-Revised (OCI-R), a self-report questionnaire for assessing the severity of OCD. This study aimed first to evaluate the psychometric properties of the Swedish translation of the OCI-R and then shed light on the frequency, severity, and symptom dimensions of OCD comorbid with other psychiatric disorders. METHODS: OCI-R data were available for 1010 individuals diagnosed with OCD, and 124 individuals diagnosed with chronic tic disorders without OCD used as a comparison group. We first performed a confirmatory factor analysis to confirm the six-factor structure of OCI-R. Then, we estimated Cronbach's alpha coefficient and the generalizability coefficient to evaluate the internal consistency of the OCI-R. We linked the data from the Swedish national registries to access and analyze psychiatric comorbidities of OCD. RESULTS: The Swedish translation of OCI-R demonstrated internal consistency and clear agreement with the OCI-R six-factor model. The mean total OCI-R score for females was significantly higher than for males. The most comorbid psychiatric condition to OCD were anxiety disorders (13.6%) and major depression (12%). CONCLUSION: The Swedish translation of OCI-R was a valid and reliable measure for assessing the severity of OCD. We observed that individuals with OCD frequently had additional comorbid psychiatric disorders and that the severity of OCD was significantly higher in individuals with at least one additional psychiatric comorbidity as compared to individuals with no psychiatric comorbidity.
35064524|a|Meta-analyses have shown that several neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders, such as autism spectrum disorder and schizophrenia, are associated with a higher prevalence of atypical (left-, non-right-, or mixed-) handedness. One neurodevelopmental disorder for which this association is unclear is attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Here, some empirical studies have found evidence for a higher prevalence of atypical handedness in individuals with ADHD compared to neurotypical individuals. However, other studies failed to establish such an association. Therefore, meta-analytic integration is critical to estimate whether or not there is an association between handedness and ADHD. We report the results of three meta-analyses (left-, mixed-, and non-right-handedness) comparing handedness in individuals with ADHD to controls (typically developing individuals). The results show evidence of a trend towards elevated levels of atypical handedness when it comes to differences in left- and mixed-handedness (p = 0.09 and p = 0.07, respectively), but do show clear evidence of elevated levels of non-right-handedness between individuals with ADHD and controls (p = 0.02). These findings are discussed in the context of the hypothesis that ADHD is a disorder in which mostly right-hemispheric brain networks are affected. Since right-handedness represents a dominance of the left motor cortex for fine motor behavior, such as writing, as well as a left-hemispheric dominance for language functions, and about 90% of individuals are right-handers, this hypothesis might explain why there is not stronger evidence for an association of left-handedness with ADHD. We suggest that the mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of ADHD might show an overlap with the mechanisms involved in handedness strength, but not handedness direction.
35064451|a|Despite increasing attention to understanding strengths in those on the autism spectrum, few studies have explored this in older individuals. The present study provides a qualitative analysis of parent-reported strengths and positive qualities of 68 15-30-year-olds with autism and/or intellectual disability (ID). Most parents (97%) reported at least one positive quality. Themes were consistent with previous studies; Personality characteristics (82%) and Sociability (53%) were reported most frequently. A Work Ethic/Motivation category not previously reported emerged. Autistic individuals (with/without ID) were more likely than those with ID-only to have a Specific Skill. Findings highlight the importance of recognizing strengths of autistic adults. Research is needed to understand how to best leverage positive qualities to promote goal achievement and quality of life.
35064235|a|
35064001|a|Consistent with current models of embodied emotions, this study investigates whether the somatosensory system shows reduced sensitivity to facial emotional expressions in autistic compared to neurotypical individuals, and if these differences are independent from between-group differences in visual processing of facial stimuli. To investigate the dynamics of somatosensory activity over and above visual carryover effects, we recorded EEG activity from two groups of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) or Typically Developing (TD) humans (male and female), while they were performing a facial emotion discrimination task and a control gender task. To probe the state of the somatosensory system during face processing, in 50% of trials we evoked somatosensory activity by delivering task-irrelevant tactile taps on participants' index finger, 105 ms after visual stimulus onset. Importantly, we isolated somatosensory from concurrent visual activity by subtracting visual responses from activity evoked by somatosensory and visual stimuli. Results revealed significant task-dependent group differences in mid-latency components of Somatosensory Evoked Potentials (SEP). ASD participants showed a selective reduction of SEP amplitudes (P100) compared to TD during emotion task, and TD, but not ASD, showed increased somatosensory responses during emotion compared to gender discrimination. Interestingly, autistic traits, but not alexithymia, significantly predicted SEP amplitudes evoked during emotion, but not gender, task. Importantly, we did not observe the same pattern of group differences in visual responses. Our study provides direct evidence of reduced recruitment of the somatosensory system during emotion discrimination in ASD and suggests that this effect is not a by-product of differences in visual processing.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENTThe somatosensory system is involved in embodiment of visually presented facial expressions of emotion. Despite autism being characterised by difficulties in emotion-related processing, no studies have addressed whether this extends to embodied representations of others' emotions. By dissociating somatosensory activity from visual evoked potentials, we provide the first evidence of reduced recruitment of the somatosensory system during emotion discrimination in autistic participants, independently from differences in visual processing between typically developing and ASD participants. Our study employs a novel methodology to reveal the neural dynamics underlying difficulties in emotion recognition in ASD and provides direct evidence that embodied simulation of others' emotional expressions operates differently in autistic individuals.
35063768|a|Social interaction deficit is core symptom of children with autism, owing to interaction of genetic predisposition and environmental toxins. Sevoflurane could induce neurotoxicity in developing brain in rodent models. This study aims to investigate whether sevoflurane anesthesia in neonatal period could impair social behaviors in male and female mice. Twenty-eight male and thirty-one female mice were randomly assigned to receive 3.0% sevoflurane or 60% oxygen on postnatal day 6. They were tested for social interaction behaviors at one- and two-month-old. In addition, the cortex and hippocampus of neonatal mice undergoing sevoflurane anesthesia were harvested for immunoblotting analysis. As a result, both male and female mice undergoing sevoflurane anesthesia showed strong sociability and weak preference for social novelty at juvenile age. In addition, the male mice developed normal preference for social novelty at early-adulthood; However, the female mice remained weak preference for social novelty. Furthurmore, sevoflurane anesthesia could decrease the levels of PSD95 but not Neuroligin-1 in the hippocampus but not cortex of neonatal mice. In conclusion, sevoflurane anesthesia in neonatal period could disturb development of social memory and impair preference for social novelty in female mice at early-adulthood, with the potential mechanism of decreasing PSD95 expression in the hippocampus of C57BL/6 mice.
35063494|a|OBJECTIVE: Considering the peak age of onset for psychosis and bipolar disorder occurs in adulthood, we investigated the co-occurrence of these disorders in adults with autism. METHODS: We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis (PROSPERO Registration Number: CRD42018104600) to (1) examine the prevalence of psychosis and bipolar disorder in adults with autism, and (2) review potential risk factors associated with their co-occurrence. RESULTS: Fifty-three studies were included. The pooled prevalence for the co-occurrence of psychosis in adults with autism was 9.4% (N = 63,657, 95%CI = 7.52, 11.72). The pooled prevalence for the co-occurrence of bipolar disorders in adults with autism was 7.5% (N = 31,739, 95%CI = 5.79, 9.53). CONCLUSIONS: Psychosis and bipolar disorder occur at a substantially higher prevalence in adults with autism compared to general population estimates. While there is an overall dearth of research examining risk factors for these disorders in autism, males were are at increased likelihood of co-occurring psychosis, and females of co-occurring bipolar disorder. These results highlight the need for ongoing assessment and monitoring of these disorders in adults with autism.
35063127|a|Recent advances in genetics, molecular biology, and stem cell biology have accelerated our understanding of neuropsychiatric disorders, like autism spectrum disorder (ASD), major depressive disorder (MDD), bipolar disorder (BD), and schizophrenia (SZ). This progress highlights the incredible complexity of both the human brain and mental illnesses from the biochemical to the cellular level. Contributing to the complexity of neuropsychiatric disorders are their polygenic nature, cellular and brain region interconnectivity, and dysregulation of human-specific neurodevelopmental processes. Here, we discuss available tools, including CRISPR-Cas9, and the applications of these tools to develop cell-based two-dimensional (2D) models and 3D brain organoid models that better represent and unravel the intricacies of neuropsychiatric disorder pathophysiology.
35062582|a|Recent years have witnessed the proliferation of social robots in various domains including special education. However, specialized tools to assess their effect on human behavior, as well as to holistically design social robot applications, are often missing. In response, this work presents novel tools for analysis of human behavior data regarding robot-assisted special education. The objectives include, first, an understanding of human behavior in response to an array of robot actions and, second, an improved intervention design based on suitable mathematical instruments. To achieve these objectives, Lattice Computing (LC) models in conjunction with machine learning techniques have been employed to construct a representation of a child's behavioral state. Using data collected during real-world robot-assisted interventions with children diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and the aforementioned behavioral state representation, time series of behavioral states were constructed. The paper then investigates the causal relationship between specific robot actions and the observed child behavioral states in order to determine how the different interaction modalities of the social robot affected the child's behavior.
35061980|a|OBJECTIVE: Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) may display extreme behaviors such as self-injury or aggression that often become refractory to psychopharmacology or behavioral intervention. Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a surgical alternative that modulates brain circuits that have yet to be clearly elucidated. In the current study the authors performed a connectomic analysis to identify brain circuitry engaged by DBS for extreme behaviors associated with ASD. METHODS: A systematic review was performed to identify prior reports of DBS as a treatment for extreme behaviors in patients with ASD. Individual patients' perioperative imaging was collected from corresponding authors. DBS electrode localization and volume of tissue activated modeling were performed. Volumes of tissue activated were used as seed points in high-resolution normative functional and structural imaging templates. The resulting individual functional and structural connectivity maps were pooled to identify networks and pathways that are commonly engaged by all targets. RESULTS: Nine patients with ASD who were receiving DBS for symptoms of aggression or self-injurious behavior were identified. All patients had some clinical improvement with DBS. Connectomic analysis of 8 patients (from the systematic review and unpublished clinical data) demonstrated a common anatomical area of shared circuitry within the anterior limb of the internal capsule. Functional analysis of 4 patients identified a common network of distant brain areas including the amygdala, insula, and anterior cingulate engaged by DBS. CONCLUSIONS: This study presents a comprehensive synopsis of the evidence for DBS in the treatment of extreme behaviors associated with ASD. Using network mapping, the authors identified key circuitry common to DBS targets.
35061560|a|High uptake of vaccinations is essential in fighting infectious diseases, including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) that causes the ongoing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. Social media play a crucial role in propagating misinformation about vaccination, including through conspiracy theories and can negatively impact trust in vaccination. Users typically engage with multiple social media platforms; however, little is known about the role and content of cross-platform use in spreading vaccination-related information. This study examined the content and dynamics of YouTube videos shared in vaccine-related tweets posted to COVID-19 conversations before the COVID-19 vaccine rollout. We screened approximately 144 million tweets posted to COVID-19 conversations and identified 930,539 unique tweets in English that discussed vaccinations posted between 1 February and 23 June 2020. We then identified links to 2,097 unique YouTube videos that were tweeted. Analysis of the video transcripts using Latent Dirichlet Allocation topic modeling and independent coders indicate the dominance of conspiracy theories. Following the World Health Organization's declaration of the COVID-19 outbreak as a public health emergency of international concern, anti-vaccination frames rapidly transitioned from claiming that vaccines cause autism to pandemic conspiracy theories, often featuring Bill Gates. Content analysis of the 20 most tweeted videos revealed that the majority (n = 15) opposed vaccination and included conspiracy theories. Their spread on Twitter was consistent with spamming and coordinated efforts. These findings show the role of cross-platform sharing of YouTube videos over Twitter as a strategy to propagate primarily anti-vaccination messages. Future policies and interventions should consider how to counteract misinformation spread via such cross-platform activities.
35060114|a|AGO1, as one of the rare genes in neurodevelopmental disorders, is involved in the microRNA-induced silencing complex. Here, we describe the clinical and genetic features of 18 individuals with de novo AGO1 variants: four new and 14 previously reported. Three variants are identified: two in-frame deletion variants and one missense variant. The spectrum of AGO1-related disorders included global development delay (GDD), intellectual disability (ID) with or without epilepsy, autism spectrum disorder, hypotonia and dysmorphisms. Focal seizures are the most common type of seizure, occasionally with atypical absence. Mild deafness may be a new phenotype of AGO1-releated disease. Gly199Ser may be a hot-spot variant of AGO1 with the same phenotype: GDD/ID, intractable epilepsy, remarkably with Rolandic discharges, and even reaching electrical status epilepticus during sleep. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
35059951|a|
35059950|a|Latino children on the autism spectrum experience less access to autism services and more barriers to service-use than non-Latino White children. Yet, existing research leaves unanswered questions about how cultural, family, and service system-level processes contribute to autism service-use disparities. This study aimed to qualitatively explore how Latina and non-Latina mothers experience similar encounters with autism services. Twenty Latina and non-Latina mothers completed semi-structured interviews regarding their experiences accessing services. Data were analyzed using applied thematic analysis. Ethnicity-based differences emerged in mothers' service-use motivations (i.e., desiring ongoing support vs. eventual departure), service evaluations (i.e., dissatisfaction vs. satisfaction), and service-seeking approaches (i.e., proactive vs. reactive). Findings illustrate how these processes underlying service engagement may contribute to service disparities for Latino children.
35059850|a|To gain a holistic approach for parental help-seeking behavior and ASD diagnosis, this study aimed to use two national birth cohort study datasets to investigate the pathway relationship between personal and social/environmental factors, including maternal perceived childcare pressure, maternal level of education, urbanization at age 3, and the chance of receiving a autism spectrum disorder (ASD) diagnosis at when children are aged 5.5 years (2.5 years later). The 2003 Taiwan Birth Cohort Pilot Study (TBCS-p; N = 1618) and 2005 Taiwan Birth Cohort Study (TBCS; N = 19,183) datasets were used. The TBCS-p and TBCS both showed similar prevalence of ASD (0.3-0.4%). Children with ASD characteristics, as measured using the Modified Checklist of Autism in Toddlers, had 8.27-18.20 times increased likelihood of receiving ASD diagnosis [TBCS confidence interval (CF) of 5.32-12.86; TBCS-p CF of 2.03-163.46]. Pathway analysis showed that, although having a mother with higher education or who lived in a city decreased the chance for ASD diagnosis, the interactive effect of a maternal higher level of education and living in a city led to an increased likelihood for ASD diagnosis. Additionally, mothers who perceived a higher level of childcare pressure were also more likely to seek medical assistance and diagnosis. Access to healthcare (living in the city), maternal level of awareness (level of education), and perceived childcare pressure are all factors that influence help-seeking behavior and diagnosis. Therefore, medical professionals should pay special attention to the developmental condition of children in underserved backgrounds and rural areas to prevent delayed diagnosis.
35059752|a|PURPOSE: The burden of mental health and substance use disorders among Italian young people have not yet been presented in detail, despite adolescents and young adults aged between 10 and 24 years constitute 14.5% of the Italian population. Therefore, the aim of this study was to provide data on the health burden of mental health and substance use disorders among young people (10-24 years) in Italy between 1990 and 2019. METHODS: Ecological study design using data from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Age- and sex-specific prevalence and years lived with disability (YLDs) of mental health and substance use disorders with the uncertainty intervals were reported as well as their percentual changes between 1990 and 2019. RESULTS: Prevalence and YLDs rates of mental health and substance use disorders showed negative trends overall between 1990 and 2019. However, diagnoses of attention-deficit/hyperactivity, autism spectrum, conduct and eating (among males) disorders increased as well as cocaine use disorder. The highest levels of disability in terms of YLDs were due to anxiety, depressive, conduct and eating disorders and alcohol use, amphetamine use and opioid use disorders. The disease burden was higher in middle-late adolescence and young adulthood than early adolescence, among females than males for mental health disorders and among males compared to females for substance use disorders. CONCLUSION: Findings of the study highlighted disorder-specific patterns of prevalence and YLDs rates and were discussed considering previous research. The public health system should continuously sustain mental health promotion and prevention efforts in young people.
35059701|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and anxiety disorders (ANX) are common neurodevelopmental conditions with several overlapping symptoms. Notably, many children and adolescents with ASD also have an ANX diagnosis, suggesting shared pathological mechanisms. Here, we leveraged structural imaging and phenotypic data from 112 youth (33 ASD, 37 ANX, 42 typically developing controls) to assess shared and distinct cortical thickness patterns of the disorders. ANX was associated with widespread increases in cortical thickness, while ASD related to a mixed pattern of subtle increases and decreases across the cortical mantle. Despite the qualitative difference in the case-control contrasts, the statistical maps from the ANX-vs-controls and ASD-vs-controls analyses were significantly correlated when correcting for spatial autocorrelation. Dimensional analysis, regressing trait anxiety and social responsiveness against cortical thickness measures, partially recapitulated diagnosis-based findings. Collectively, our findings provide evidence for a common axis of neurodevelopmental disturbances as well as distinct effects of ASD and ANX on cortical thickness.
35058813|a|Background: Limited success of previous clinical trials for Fragile X syndrome (FXS) has led researchers to consider combining different drugs to correct the pleiotropic consequences caused by the absence of the Fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP). Here, we report the results of the LovaMiX clinical trial, the first trial for FXS combining two disease-modifying drugs, lovastatin, and minocycline, which have both shown positive effects when used independently. Aim: The main goals of the study were to assess the safety and efficacy of a treatment combining lovastatin and minocycline for patients with FXS. Design: Pilot Phase II open-label clinical trial. Patients with a molecular diagnostic of FXS were first randomized to receive, in two-step titration either lovastatin or minocycline for 8 weeks, followed by dual treatment with lovastatin 40 mg and minocycline 100 mg for 2 weeks. Clinical assessments were performed at the beginning, after 8 weeks of monotherapy, and at week 20 (12 weeks of combined therapy). Outcome Measures: The primary outcome measure was the Aberrant Behavior Checklist-Community (ABC-C) global score. Secondary outcome measures included subscales of the FXS specific ABC-C (ABC-CFX), the Anxiety, Depression, and Mood Scale (ADAMS), the Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS), the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Functions (BRIEF), and the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale second edition (VABS-II). Results: Twenty-one individuals out of 22 completed the trial. There were no serious adverse events related to the use of either drugs alone or in combination, suggesting good tolerability and safety profile of the combined therapy. Significant improvement was noted on the primary outcome measure with a 40% decrease on ABC-C global score with the combined therapy. Several outcome measures also showed significance. Conclusion: The combination of lovastatin and minocycline is safe in patients for FXS individuals and appears to improve several elements of the behavior. These results set the stage for a larger, placebo-controlled double-blind clinical trial to confirm the beneficial effects of the combined therapy.
35058648|a|
35056323|a|Background and Objectives: Chromosomal microarray offers superior sensitivity for identification of submicroscopic copy number variants (CNVs) and is recommended for the initial genetic testing of patients with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). This study aims to determine the diagnostic yield of array comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) in ASD patients from a cohort of Chinese patients in Taiwan. Materials and Methods: Enrolled in this study were 80 ASD children (49 males and 31 females; 2-16 years old) followed up at Taipei MacKay Memorial Hospital between January 2010 and December 2020. The genomic DNA extracted from blood samples was analyzed by array-CGH via the Affymetrix GeneChip Genome-Wide Human single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and NimbleGen International Standards for Cytogenomic Arrays (ISCA) Plus Cytogenetic Arrays. The CNVs were classified into five groups: pathogenic (pathologic variant), likely pathogenic (potential pathologic variant), likely benign (potential normal genomic variant), benign (normal genomic variant), and uncertain clinical significance (variance of uncertain significance), according to the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) guidelines. Results: We identified 47 CNVs, 31 of which in 27 patients were clinically significant. The overall diagnostic yield was 33.8%. The most frequently clinically significant CNV was 15q11.2 deletion, which was present in 4 (5.0%) patients. Conclusions: In this study, a satisfactory diagnostic yield of array-CGH was demonstrated in a Taiwanese ASD patient cohort, supporting the clinical usefulness of array-CGH as the first-line testing of ASD in Taiwan.
35055151|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental condition characterized by the early onset of communication and behavioral problems. ASD is highly heritable; however, environmental factors also play a considerable role in this disorder. A significant part of both syndromic and idiopathic autism cases could be attributed to disorders caused by mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)-dependent translation deregulation. This narrative review analyzes both bioinformatic and experimental evidence that connects mTOR signaling to the maternal autoantibody-related (MAR) autism spectrum and autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders simultaneously. In addition, we reconstruct a network presenting the interactions between the mTOR signaling and eight MAR ASD genes coding for ASD-specific maternal autoantibody target proteins. The research discussed in this review demonstrates novel perspectives and validates the need for a subtyping of ASD on the grounds of pathogenic mechanisms. The utter necessity of designing ELISA-based test panels to identify all antibodies related to autism-like behavior is also considered.
35054330|a|This study proposes a Computer-Aided Diagnostic (CAD) system to diagnose subjects with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The CAD system identifies morphological anomalies within the brain regions of ASD subjects. Cortical features are scored according to their contribution in diagnosing a subject to be ASD or typically developed (TD) based on a trained machine-learning (ML) model. This approach opens the hope for developing a new CAD system for early personalized diagnosis of ASD. We propose a framework to extract the cerebral cortex from structural MRI as well as identifying the altered areas in the cerebral cortex. This framework consists of the following five main steps: (i) extraction of cerebral cortex from structural MRI; (ii) cortical parcellation to a standard atlas; (iii) identifying ASD associated cortical markers; (iv) adjusting feature values according to sex and age; (v) building tailored neuro-atlases to identify ASD; and (vi) artificial neural networks (NN) are trained to classify ASD. The system is tested on the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE I) sites achieving an average balanced accuracy score of 97+-2%. This paper demonstrates the ability to develop an objective CAD system using structure MRI and tailored neuro-atlases describing specific developmental patterns of the brain in autism.
35054136|a|The purpose of this review is to summarize the current acquiredknowledge of Candida overgrowth in the intestine as a possible etiology of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The influence of Candida sp. on the immune system, brain, and behavior of children with ASD isdescribed. The benefits of interventions such as a carbohydrates-exclusion diet, probiotic supplementation, antifungal agents, fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT), and microbiota transfer therapy (MTT) will be also discussed. Our literature query showed that the results of most studies do not fully support the hypothesis that Candida overgrowth is correlated with gastrointestinal (GI) problems and contributes to autism behavioral symptoms occurrence. On the one hand, it was reported that the modulation of microbiota composition in the gut may decrease Candida overgrowth, help reduce GI problems and autism symptoms. On the other hand, studies on humans suggesting the beneficial effects of a sugar-free diet, probiotic supplementation, FMT and MTT treatment in ASD are limited and inconclusive. Due to the increasing prevalence of ASD, studies on the etiology of this disorder are extremely needed and valuable. However, to elucidate the possible involvement of Candida in the pathophysiology of ASD, more reliable and well-designed research is certainly required.
35053859|a|The COVID-19 outbreak has disrupted the daily routine of the population worldwide, including autistic people and their caregivers, with severe consequences on mental health. On one hand, the reduced social contacts and the interruption of outpatient and daycare services during the lockdown have represented a real challenge for autistic people and their caregivers. On the other hand, confinement has allowed individuals to spend more time pursuing their interests and stay home with their family members without feeling the pressure of social expectations. The present study aimed to compare the levels of personal wellbeing, family distress, insomnia, and resilience between caregivers of autistic people and caregivers of people with other neurodevelopmental, psychiatric, or relational disabilities. A web survey was completed by 383 participants, of which 141 were primary caregivers of autistic people. We did not find any significant difference between caregivers of autistic and non-autistic people in any of the considered psychological variables. Lower age of the autistic family member and lower resilience levels were significantly associated with higher individual distress in the group of caregivers of autistic people. Our findings do not corroborate the hypothesis that caregivers of autistic individuals have had more severe consequences than other caregivers during the lockdown. However, they confirm the importance of promoting resilient coping strategies in autistic people and their caregivers.
35053837|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complicated neurological developmental disorder that manifests itself in a variety of ways. The child diagnosed with ASD and their parents' daily lives can be dramatically improved with early diagnosis and appropriate medical intervention. The applicability of static features extracted from autistic children's face photographs as a biomarker to distinguish them from typically developing children is investigated in this study paper. We used five pre-trained CNN models: MobileNet, Xception, EfficientNetB0, EfficientNetB1, and EfficientNetB2 as feature extractors and a DNN model as a binary classifier to identify autism in children accurately. We used a publicly available dataset to train the suggested models, which consisted of face pictures of children diagnosed with autism and controls classed as autistic and non-autistic. The Xception model outperformed the others, with an AUC of 96.63%, a sensitivity of 88.46%, and an NPV of 88%. EfficientNetB0 produced a consistent prediction score of 59% for autistic and non-autistic groups with a 95% confidence level.
35053785|a|This study compared the effects of physical exercise (PE) and virtual training (VT) on the improvement of the visual attention mechanism in children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). One hundred eighty-nine children with ASD were recruited from Orphan School in Liaoning Province, China. After screening, 100 children ultimately participated in the experiment. Children with ASD were randomly assigned to VT (VT, n = 34), PE (PE, n = 33) and control group (CG, n = 33). The VT group experiment was performed in a virtual environment through the game FIFA21 three times per week for 6 weeks. The PE group played physical football matches three times per week for 6 weeks. Children with ASD in the CG group did not receive VT or PE but only received psychological counseling. Visual attention of children with ASD is evaluated by using the multiple object tracking paradigm (MOT). After 6 weeks of observation, although none of the three groups saw improvements in the correct rate of ring tracking, the observations of the VT and PE groups were significant (p < 0.05) compared to the CG group in finding detection rate of probe stimulus. Through MOT tests, VT and PE improved the detection rate of probe stimulus in children with ASD. Therefore, this paper indicates that VT and PE can improve the visual attention ability of children with ASD.
35053774|a|Persons with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have impaired mentalizing skills. In this study, a group of persons with ASD traits (high-AQ scores) initially received sham tDCS before completing a pre-test in two mentalizing tasks: false belief and self-other judgments. Over the next week, on four consecutive days, they received sessions of anodal electrical stimulation (a-tDCS) over the right temporo-parietal junction (rTPJ), a region frequently associated with the theory of mind. On the last day, after the stimulation session, they completed a new set of mentalizing tasks. A control group (with low-AQ scores) matched in age, education and intelligence received just sham stimulation and completed the same pre-test and post-test. The results showed that the high-AQ group improved their performance (faster responses), after a-tDCS, in the false belief and in the self-other judgments of mental features, whereas they did not change performance in the false photographs or the self-other judgments of physical features. These selective improvements cannot be attributed to increased familiarity with the tasks, because the performance of the low-AQ control group remained stable about one week later. Therefore, our study provides initial proof that tDCS could be used to improve mentalizing skills in persons with ASD traits.
35053753|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental condition in which visual attention and visual search strategies are altered. Eye-tracking paradigms have been used to detect these changes. In our study, 18 toddlers with ASD and 18 toddlers with typical development (TD; age range 12-36 months) underwent an eye-tracking paradigm where a face was shown together with a series of objects. Eye gaze was coded according to three areas of interest (AOIs) indicating where the toddlers' gaze was directed: 'Face', 'Object', and 'No-stimulus fixation'. The fixation sequence for the ASD and TD groups was modelled with a Markov chain model, obtaining transition probabilities between AOIs. Our results indicate that the transition between AOIs could differentiate between toddlers with ASD or TD, highlighting different visual exploration patterns between the groups. The sequence of exploration is strictly conditioned based on previous fixations, among which 'No-stimulus fixation' has a critical role in differentiating the two groups. Furthermore, our analyses underline difficulties of individuals with ASD to engage in stimulus exploration. These results could improve clinical and interventional practice by considering this dimension among the evaluation process.
35053752|a|Children with fragile X syndrome and William Beuren syndrome share several socio-communicative deficits. In both populations, around 30/35% of individuals meets criteria for autism spectrum disorder on gold standard instruments. Notwithstanding, few studies have explored feasibility and validity of therapy for socio-communicative deficits in individuals with these genetic conditions. In this study, we present preliminary data on a pilot RCT aimed to verify the effectiveness of cooperative parent-mediated therapy for socio-communicative deficits in a transdiagnostic perspective in a small sample of 12 participants. Our preliminary data showed that the experimental group had significant improvement in one socio-communicative skill (responsivity) and in clinical global impression, while the control group in an adaptive measure of socialization and word production. Implications of these results are then discussed.
35053735|a|The Child Behavior Checklist 1.5-5 (CBCL 1.5-5) is applied to identify emotional and behavioral problems on children with developmental disabilities (e.g., autism spectrum disorder [ASD] and developmental delays [DD]). To understand whether there are variations between these two groups on CBCL DSM-oriented scales, we took two invariance analyses on 443 children (228 children with ASD). The first analysis used measurement invariance and multiple-group factor analysis on the test structure. The second analysis used item-level analysis, i.e., differential item functioning (DIF), to discover whether group memberships responded differently on some items even though underlying trait levels were the same. It was discovered that, on the test structure, the Anxiety Problems scale did not achieve metric invariance. The other scales achieved metric invariance; DIF analyses further revealed that there were items that functioned differently across subscales. These DIF items were mostly about children's reactions to the surrounding environment. Our findings provide implications for clinicians to use CBCL DSM-oriented scales on differentiating children with ASD and children with DD. In addition, researchers need to be mindful about how items were responded differently, even though there were no mean differences on the surface.
35053715|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental disability in early childhood. Early identification and intervention in children with ASD are essential for children and their families. This study aimed to identify the earliest signs of ASD. Using a large cohort including data from 104,062 fetal records in the Japan Environment and Children's Study, we examined the Ages and Stages Questionnaires  (ASQ-3TM) scores of children with and without ASD. The ASQ-3 comprises five domains: communication, gross motor, fine motor, problem solving, and personal-social. The ASQ-3 scores were obtained at ages 6 months, 1 year, and 3 years. There were 64,501 children with available ASQ-3 data. The number of children diagnosed with ASD was 188 (0.29%) at 3 years of age. The highest relative risk (RR) for any domain below the monitoring score at 6 months was in the communication (RR 1.90, 95% CI 1.29-2.78, p = 0.0041), followed by fine motor (RR 1.50, 95% CI 1.28-1.76, p < 0.0001) domain. A low ASQ-3 score in the communication domain at 6 months was related to an ASD diagnosis at 3 years of age. The ASQ-3 score at 6 months can contribute to the early identification of and intervention for ASD.
35053708|a|Over decades, the concern for the quality of psychoeducational practices for students with autism spectrum disorders has led to study to what extent are evidence-based educational methods disseminated among teachers. The purpose of this cross-sectional study, taking as reference Hsiao and Sorensen's previous research, was to identify through a survey to what extent social-communication evidence-based practices for these students were provided in teacher education and in-service training programs, in a sample of 108 special education teachers from Spain, and to compare these results with Hsiao and Sorensen's. Overall, more than 70% of the teachers reported that evidence-based practices in their teacher education programs (87.6%) and in-service training programs (73.6%) were never taught or mentioned incidentally. Finally, a higher percentage of addressing on each practice (i.e., mentioned and discussed or mentioned and taught through direct instruction) is shown in the sample of American teachers compared to the Spaniards, in both training paths.
35053076|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterised by problems with social interaction, verbal and nonverbal communication and repetitive behaviour. In mice, the 14th postnatal day is believed to correspond to the third trimester of human embryonic development and is considered a vital period for central nervous system development. It has been shown that ASD affects 2 to 3 times more male than female individuals. In the present study, ASD was induced in 14 postnatal day (PND) BALB/c mice using valproic acid (VPA). VPA administration brought about substantial differences in the histoarchitecture of the brain in both male and female mice, linked to behavioural deficits. We observed that both male and female mice showed similar morphological changes in the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus and Purkinje cells. We also observed hair loss from PND 17 to 25, which was again similar between male and female mice. However, there were higher rates of change in the cerebral cortex, frontal cortex and temporal lobe and hippocampus in VPA-treated male animals. With respect to the cerebellum, we did not observe any alterations by haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, but detailed morphological observation using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) showed a higher rate of phenotype changes in VPA-treated male animals. Moreover, 5-HT2A receptor protein levels were upregulated in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus and Purkinje cells in VPA-treated male mice compared with control animals and VPA-treated female mice, as shown by immunohistochemical analysis. Based on all these findings, we conclude that male animals are more susceptible to VPA-induced ASD than females.
35052798|a|The addictive properties of psychostimulants such as cocaine, amphetamine, methamphetamine, and methylphenidate are based on their ability to increase dopaminergic neurotransmission in the reward system. While cocaine and methamphetamine are predominately used recreationally, amphetamine and methylphenidate also work as effective therapeutics to treat symptoms of disorders including attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Although both the addictive properties of psychostimulant drugs and their therapeutic efficacy are influenced by genetic variation, very few genes that regulate these processes in humans have been identified. This is largely due to population heterogeneity which entails a requirement for large samples. Drosophila melanogaster exhibits similar psychostimulant responses to humans, a high degree of gene conservation, and allow performance of behavioral assays in a large population. Additionally, amphetamine and methylphenidate reduce impairments in fly models of ADHD-like behavior. Therefore, Drosophila represents an ideal translational model organism to tackle the genetic components underlying the effects of psychostimulants. Here, we break down the many assays that reliably quantify the effects of cocaine, amphetamine, methamphetamine, and methylphenidate in Drosophila. We also discuss how Drosophila is an efficient and cost-effective model organism for identifying novel candidate genes and molecular mechanisms involved in the behavioral responses to psychostimulant drugs.
35052591|a|Allicin (diallylthiosulfinate) is a defense molecule produced by cellular contents of garlic (Allium sativum L.). On tissue damage, the non-proteinogenic amino acid alliin (S-allylcysteine sulfoxide) is converted to allicin in an enzyme-mediated process catalysed by alliinase. Allicin is hydrophobic in nature, can efficiently cross the cellular membranes and behaves as a reactive sulfur species (RSS) inside the cells. It is physiologically active molecule with the ability to oxidise the thiol groups of glutathione and between cysteine residues in proteins. Allicin has shown anticancer, antimicrobial, antioxidant properties and also serves as an efficient therapeutic agent against cardiovascular diseases. In this context, the present review describes allicin as an antioxidant, and neuroprotective molecule that can ameliorate the cognitive abilities in case of neurodegenerative and neuropsychological disorders. As an antioxidant, allicin fights the reactive oxygen species (ROS) by downregulation of NOX (NADPH oxidizing) enzymes, it can directly interact to reduce the cellular levels of different types of ROS produced by a variety of peroxidases. Most of the neuroprotective actions of allicin are mediated via redox-dependent pathways. Allicin inhibits neuroinflammation by suppressing the ROS production, inhibition of TLR4/MyD88/NF-kappaB, P38 and JNK pathways. As an inhibitor of cholinesterase and (AChE) and butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE) it can be applied to manage the Alzheimer's disease, helps to maintain the balance of neurotransmitters in case of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention deficit hyperactive syndrome (ADHD). In case of acute traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI) allicin protects neuron damage by regulating inflammation, apoptosis and promoting the expression levels of Nrf2 (nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2). Metal induced neurodegeneration can also be attenuated and cognitive abilities of patients suffering from neurological diseases can be ameliorates by allicin administration.
35052433|a|Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by hyperactivity, impulsivity, and/or inattention, which are symptoms also observed in many rare genetic disorders. We searched for genes involved in Mendelian disorders presenting with ADHD symptoms in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database, to curate a list of new candidate risk genes for ADHD. We explored the enrichment of functions and pathways in this gene list, and tested whether rare or common variants in these genes are associated with ADHD or with its comorbidities. We identified 139 genes, causal for 137 rare disorders, mainly related to neurodevelopmental and brain function. Most of these Mendelian disorders also present with other psychiatric traits that are often comorbid with ADHD. Using whole exome sequencing (WES) data from 668 ADHD cases, we found rare variants associated with the dimension of the severity of inattention symptoms in three genes: KIF11, WAC, and CRBN. Then, we focused on common variants and identified six genes associated with ADHD (in 19,099 cases and 34,194 controls): MANBA, UQCC2, HIVEP2, FOPX1, KANSL1, and AUH. Furthermore, HIVEP2, FOXP1, and KANSL1 were nominally associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (18,382 cases and 27,969 controls), as well as HIVEP2 with anxiety (7016 cases and 14,475 controls), and FOXP1 with aggression (18,988 individuals), which is in line with the symptomatology of the rare disorders they are responsible for. In conclusion, inspecting Mendelian disorders and the genes responsible for them constitutes a valuable approach for identifying new risk genes and the mechanisms of complex disorders.
35052406|a|Tourette syndrome (TS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by motor and vocal tics and strong association with autistic deficits, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The genetic overlap between TS and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) includes those genes that encode the neurexin trans-synaptic connexus (NTSC) inclusive of the presynaptic neurexins (NRXNs) and postsynaptic neuroligins (NLGNs), cerebellin precursors (CBLNs in complex with the glutamate ionotropic receptor deltas (GRIDs)) and the leucine-rich repeat transmembrane proteins (LRRTMs). In this study, we report the first evidence of a TS and ASD association with yet another NTSC gene family member, namely LRRTM4. Duplication of the terminal exon of LRRTM4 was found in two females with TS from the same family (mother and daughter) in association with autistic traits and ASD.
35052391|a|Nucleolin (NCL/C23; OMIM: 164035) is a major nucleolar protein that plays a critical role in multiple processes, including ribosome assembly and maturation, chromatin decondensation, and pre-rRNA transcription. Due to its diverse functions, nucleolin has frequently been implicated in pathological processes, including cancer and viral infection. We recently identified a de novo frameshifting indel mutation of NCL, p.Gly664Glufs*70, through whole-exome sequencing of autism spectrum disorder trios. Through the transfection of constructs encoding either a wild-type human nucleolin or a mutant nucleolin with the same C-terminal sequence predicted for the autism proband, and by using co-localization with the nucleophosmin (NPM; B23) protein, we have shown that the nucleolin mutation leads to mislocalization of the NCL protein from the nucleolus to the nucleoplasm. Moreover, a construct with a nonsense mutation at the same residue, p.Gly664*, shows a very similar effect on the location of the NCL protein, thus confirming the presence of a predicted nucleolar location signal in this region of the NCL protein. Real-time fluorescence recovery experiments show significant changes in the kinetics and mobility of mutant NCL protein in the nucleoplasm of HEK293Tcells. Several other studies also report de novoNCL mutations in ASD or neurodevelopmental disorders. The altered mislocalization and dynamics of mutant NCL (p.G664Glufs*70/p.G664*) may have relevance to the etiopathlogy of NCL-related ASD and other neurodevelopmental phenotypes.
35052376|a|Whole-exome sequencing (WES) is an effective approach to identify the susceptibility of genetic variants of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The Israel Ministry of Health supports WES as an adjunct tool for ASD diagnosis, despite its unclear diagnostic yield and cost effectiveness. To address this knowledge gap, we applied WES to a population-based sample of 182 Bedouin and Jewish children with ASD from southern Israel, and assessed its yield in a gene panel of 205 genes robustly associated with ASD. We then compared the incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs) for an ASD diagnosis by WES, chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA), and CMA + WES. Overall, 32 ASD candidate variants were detected in 28 children, corresponding to an overall WES diagnostic yield of 15.4%. Interestingly, the diagnostic yield was significantly higher for the Bedouin children than for the Jewish children, i.e., 27.6% vs. 11.1% (p = 0.036). The most cost-effective means for genetic testing was the CMA alone, followed closely by the CMA + WES strategy (ICER = USD 117 and USD 124.8 per child). Yet, WES alone could become more cost effective than the other two approaches if there was to be a 25% increase in its yield or a 50% decrease in its cost. These findings suggest that WES should be recommended to facilitate ASD diagnosis in Israel, especially for highly consanguineous populations, such as the Bedouin.
35052369|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complex neurodevelopmental condition that is characterized by differences in social interaction, repetitive behaviors, restricted interests, and sensory differences beginning early in life. Especially sensory symptoms are highly correlated with the severity of other behavioral differences. ASD is a highly heterogeneous condition on multiple levels, including clinical presentation, genetics, and developmental trajectories. Over a thousand genes have been implicated in ASD. This has facilitated the generation of more than two hundred genetic mouse models that are contributing to understanding the biological underpinnings of ASD. Since the first symptoms already arise during early life, it is especially important to identify both spatial and temporal gene functions in relation to the ASD phenotype. To further decompose the heterogeneity, ASD-related genes can be divided into different subgroups based on common functions, such as genes involved in synaptic function. Furthermore, finding common biological processes that are modulated by this subgroup of genes is essential for possible patient stratification and the development of personalized early treatments. Here, we review the current knowledge on behavioral rodent models of synaptic dysfunction by focusing on behavioral phenotypes, spatial and temporal gene function, and molecular targets that could lead to new targeted gene-based therapy.
35052216|a|Parents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) children generally suffer from poor coping and an impaired quality of life (QoL). This systematic review investigates parenting stress, positive reappraisal coping, and QoL in parents with ASD children. A literature search was carried out for publications written in English on the selected investigation topics using five databases, namely, Scopus, PubMed, Wiley, ScienceDirect Online, and EBSCO. Only studies investigating or measuring parenting stress, positive reappraisal coping, and QoL in ASD were included. Our results indicate that parents with ASD children have high stress levels. This is associated with the ineffective use of coping strategies and a low QoL. Adaptive coping strategies are related to a higher QoL, whereas maladaptive coping techniques are related to a worse QoL. Positive reappraisal coping is negatively correlated to meaningfulness, and it is used by parents to change their daily routines in order to motivate themselves towards new and evolving goals in life. Finally, we found a significant negative correlation between parenting stress, positive reappraisal coping, and the QoL of parents with ASD children. Positive reappraisal coping as a strategy helps parents adapt to stress and was found to be a potential mediatory function between parental stress and QoL.
35051743|a|This paper examines how parents of children diagnosed with autism resist the medicalization of their children's behavior. Drawing on video and ethnographic data collected over four years of fieldwork at a clinic for developmental disorders, the paper distinguishes two orders of practice - that of the clinic and that of the family - and argues that behavior which is interpreted as disordered in the clinic may be seen as ordinary in the home. These different interpretations reflect and renew distinct orders of sensemaking in the clinic and home, and parents mobilize familial knowledge of the child to counter the medicalization of specific behavior patterns, even where they otherwise accept an autism diagnosis. In showing how medicalization and labelling are achieved and resisted in the mundane details of social interaction, the paper contributes to studies of diagnosis, disability, and deviance. Further, the myriad ways parents and clinicians contest which regions of a child's behavior get medicalized - i.e. which behavioral patterns are labeled disordered - present a challenge to binary conceptions of medicalization, recommending instead a more nuanced model of medicalization as a multi-dimensional continuum: more or less, rather than either-or.
35051360|a|In this issue of Neuron, structures by Zheng et al. (2021) provide a newly comprehensive view of KCNQ channel interaction with phosphatidyl inositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2), yielding insights for modulatory mechanisms of channels implicated in deafness, epilepsy, autism, and intellectual disability.
35051175|a|To determine the contribution of defective splicing in Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD), the most common neurodevelopmental disorder, a high throughput Massively Parallel Splicing Assay (MaPSY) was employed and identified 42 exonic splicing mutants out of 725 coding de novo variants discovered in the sequencing of ASD families. A redesign of the minigene constructs in MaPSY revealed that upstream exons with strong 5' splice sites increase the magnitude of skipping phenotypes observed in downstream exons. Select hits were validated by RT-PCR and amplicon sequencing in patient cell lines. Exonic splicing mutants were enriched in probands relative to unaffected siblings -especially synonymous variants (7.5% vs 3.5%, respectively). Of the 26 genes disrupted by exonic splicing mutations, 6 were in known ASD genes and 3 were in paralogs of known ASD genes. Of particular interest was a synonymous variant in TNRC6C - an ASD gene paralog with interactions with other ASD genes. Clinical records of 3 ASD patients with TNRC6C variant revealed respiratory issues consistent with phenotypes observed in TNRC6 depleted mice. Overall, this study highlights the need for splicing analysis in determining variant pathogenicity, especially as it relates to ASD.
35050480|a|Autism spectrum disorders have been linked to genetics, gut microbiota dysbiosis (gut dysbiosis), neurotoxin exposures, maternal allergies or autoimmune diseases. Two barriers to ingested neurotoxin transport into the central nervous system of a fetus or child are the gastrointestinal wall of the mother or child and the blood-brain barrier of the fetus or child. Inflammation from gut dysbiosis or inflammation from a disease or other agent can increase the gastrointestinal wall and the blood-brain barrier permeabilities to enable neurotoxins to reach the brain of a fetus or child. Postnatal gut dysbiosis is a particular inflammation risk for autism spectrum disorders caused by neurotoxin transport into a child's brain. An extensive gut dysbiosis or another source of inflammation such as a disease or other agent in combination with neurotoxins, including aluminum, mercury, lead, arsenic, cadmium, arsenic, organophosphates, and neurotoxic bacterial toxins and fungal toxins resulting from the gut dysbiosis, can elevate neurotoxin levels in a fetal or child brain to cause neurodevelopmental damage and initiate an autism spectrum disorder. The neurotoxins aluminum and mercury are especially synergistic in causing neurodevelopmental damage. There are three plausible causational pathways for autism spectrum disorders. They include inflammation and neurotoxin loading into the fetal brain during the prenatal neurodevelopment period, inflammation and neurotoxin loading into the brain during the postnatal neurodevelopment period or a two-stage loading of neurotoxins into the brain during both the prenatal and postnatal neurodevelopment periods.
35050439|a|Activation refers to patients' belief, knowledge, ability, and persistence to manage care. The concept is adapted to parent activation in developmental disorders. This study examined the psychometrics of the Parent Activation Measure for Developmental Disabilities (PAM-DD) and factors related to parent activation in ASD. Data from 658 caregivers of children with ASD in the Autism Treatment Network Registry Call Back Assessment study were analyzed. The actual ordering of the scale items was inconsistent with the assumptions of a Guttman scaling. Factor analysis revealed two PAM-DD factors. Lower child symptom severity was related to higher Factor 1 and lower Factor 2 activation. Future studies should use caution when treating PAM-DD as a Guttman and unidimensional scale.
35050193|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental condition characterized by deficits in social interaction, impaired communication, and repetitive behaviors. ASD presents a 3:1 ratio of diagnosed boys and girls, raising the question regarding sexual dimorphic mechanisms underlying ASD symptoms, and their molecular basis. Here, we performed in vivo proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy in juvenile male and female Tsc2+/- mice (an established genetic animal model of ASD). Moreover, behavior and ultrasonic vocalizations during social and repetitive tasks were analyzed. We found significant sexual dimorphisms in the levels of metabolites in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. Further, we observed that female mutant animals had a differential social behavior and presented an increase in repetitive behavior. Importantly, while mutant females displayed a more simplified communication during social tasks, mutant males exhibited a similar less complex vocal repertoire but during repetitive tasks. These results hint toward sex-dependent alterations in molecular and metabolic pathways, which can lead to the sexual dimorphic behaviors and communication observed in social and repetitive environments.
35049626|a|Burnout in healthcare workers (HCWs) is defined as a state of emotional, physical, and mental exhaustion that results from unmanaged, excessive, and long-term workplace stressors. This study aims to assess the prevalence of burnout and the levels of anxiety and depression among HCWs who primarily work with children who have autism spectrum disorder (ASD). A quantitative cross-sectional survey was conducted utilizing the Arabic version of the Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI), Areas of Worklife Survey (AWS), Patient Health Questionnaire for Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD-7), and Patient Health Questionnaire for Depression (PHQ-9). Among the 381 participants working in autism centers, the majority were young Saudi females (326) working full-time as specialists in the private sector with less than five years of experience. The HCWs' overall mean scores on the three Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI) subscales: emotional exhaustion (EE), depersonalization (DP), and personal accomplishment (PA) were 62%, 23.7%, and 76.5%, respectively. A total of 51.4% of HCWs reported moderate to high anxiety levels on GAD-7, and 47.8% showed moderate to very high levels of depression on PHQ-9. The mean perceived EE converged significantly but negatively on their overall mean perceived satisfaction with AWS (p-value < 0.001), demonstrating that greater emotional fatigue predicts less satisfaction with their work. The PA scores correlated significantly and positively with their overall mean satisfaction with their AWS score (p-value < 0.001). Considering sociodemographic variables, HCWs aged between 20-29 years have significantly lower mean PA scores than HCWs aged thirty and older (p = 0.007). Also, male HCWs perceived significantly higher work-related DP than females. More research is required to determine the nature of variables that contribute to burnout, depression, and anxiety in HCWs helping children with ASD.
35049473|a|BACKGROUND: Long-term 'not in education, employment or training' (NEET) status is an important indicator of youth marginalisation. AIMS: To carry out a comprehensive overview of the associations between different psychiatric illnesses and long-term NEET status. METHOD: We used the register-based 1987 Finnish Birth Cohort study, which includes all live births in Finland during that year. The analyses comprised 55 273 individuals after exclusions for intellectual disability, death or emigration. We predicted that psychiatric disorders, diagnosed by specialist services between 1998 and 2007 when the cohort were 10-20 years of age, would be associated with subsequent long-term NEET (defined as NEET for at least 5 years between 2008 and 2015, when they were 20-28 years of age). RESULTS: In total, 1438 individuals (2.6%) were long-term NEET during follow-up and the associations between long-term NEET and the 11 diagnostic categories we studied were statistically significant (P < 0.001). In multivariate models we included sociodemographic characteristics and upper secondary education as covariates, and the highest effect sizes, measured by odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI), were found for psychosis (OR = 12.0, 95% CI 9.5-15.2) and autism spectrum disorder (OR = 17.3, 95% CI 11.5-26.0). If individuals had not successfully completed this education, 70.6% of those with autism spectrum disorder and 48.4% of those with psychosis were later long-term NEET. CONCLUSIONS: Adolescents who receive treatment for psychiatric disorders, particularly autism spectrum disorder or psychosis, need support to access education and employment. This could help to prevent marginalisation in early adulthood.
35048876|a|BACKGROUND: Studying phenotypic and genetic characteristics of age at onset (AAO) and polarity at onset (PAO) in bipolar disorder can provide new insights into disease pathology and facilitate the development of screening tools. AIMS: To examine the genetic architecture of AAO and PAO and their association with bipolar disorder disease characteristics. METHOD: Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) and polygenic score (PGS) analyses of AAO (n = 12 977) and PAO (n = 6773) were conducted in patients with bipolar disorder from 34 cohorts and a replication sample (n = 2237). The association of onset with disease characteristics was investigated in two of these cohorts. RESULTS: Earlier AAO was associated with a higher probability of psychotic symptoms, suicidality, lower educational attainment, not living together and fewer episodes. Depressive onset correlated with suicidality and manic onset correlated with delusions and manic episodes. Systematic differences in AAO between cohorts and continents of origin were observed. This was also reflected in single-nucleotide variant-based heritability estimates, with higher heritabilities for stricter onset definitions. Increased PGS for autism spectrum disorder (beta = -0.34 years, s.e. = 0.08), major depression (beta = -0.34 years, s.e. = 0.08), schizophrenia (beta = -0.39 years, s.e. = 0.08), and educational attainment (beta = -0.31 years, s.e. = 0.08) were associated with an earlier AAO. The AAO GWAS identified one significant locus, but this finding did not replicate. Neither GWAS nor PGS analyses yielded significant associations with PAO. CONCLUSIONS: AAO and PAO are associated with indicators of bipolar disorder severity. Individuals with an earlier onset show an increased polygenic liability for a broad spectrum of psychiatric traits. Systematic differences in AAO across cohorts, continents and phenotype definitions introduce significant heterogeneity, affecting analyses.
35048566|a|Verbal fluency is a cognitive function reflecting executive functions and the ability to retrieve the appropriate information from memory quickly. Previous studies reported conflicting results-impaired and intact verbal fluency-in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Most studies concentrate on overall word productivity, errors, perseverations, clustering, or switching. We used a comprehensive approach to evaluate the reported discrepancy in the literature and introduced a new angle using the concept of word abstraction and imageability. Moreover, we analyzed the performance in two-time intervals (0-30 s and 31-60 s) to assess the temporal dynamics of verbal fluency and a possible activation or initiation deficit in autism. Sixteen adults with ASD and 16 neurotypical control participants, matched by gender, age, and education level, participated in our study. Contrary to our expectations, we did not find a significant difference between groups in word productivity, the number of errors, clustering, or temporal dynamics, neither in semantic nor in phonemic fluency tasks. Surprisingly, the two study groups' performance did not differ in terms of imageability or concreteness characteristics either. Our results raise the possibility that verbal fluency performance is intact in autism. We also suggest using a comprehensive approach when measuring fluency in autism. LAY SUMMARY: People with autism tend to think and communicate differently. In our study, we tested whether people with autism come up with more concrete or imageable words and whether their performance is better compared with neurotypicals in the beginning or in the later phase of a task measuring how many words they can produce in a minute. We did not detect any difference between the two groups; however, we recommend studying verbal fluency in autism from more and different angles in the future.
35048558|a|Parents of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) experience posttraumatic growth (PTG). No study has investigated the moderating effect of social support and family function between symptom severity and PTG. The study aims to examine whether social support and family function moderate the relationship between symptom severity and PTG among parents of children with ASD. Using a cross-sectional design, a total of 385 parents of children with ASD were recruited from September 2019 to November 2020 by convenience sampling. Participants completed the Posttraumatic Growth Inventory, Social Support Rating Scale, Autism Behavior Checklist, and Family Apgar Index. Both social support (r = 0.354, p < 0.01) and family function (r = 0.379, p < 0.05) were significantly related to PTG. Although symptom severity was not significantly related to PTG (p > 0.05), social support moderated the correlation between symptom severity and PTG [beta(SE) = -0.134 (0.719), p < 0.01, 95% CI = (-3.552, -0.723)]; the positive association was stronger for low social support [beta(SE) = 0.145 (0.054), t = 2.675, p < 0.01, 95% CI = (0.038, 0.252)], while the negative association was weaker for high social support [beta(SE) = -0.121 (0.051), t = -2.378, p < 0.05, 95% CI = (-0.221, -0.021)]. Family function did not moderate the relationship (p > 0.05). Higher social support appears to buffer the detrimental effect of symptom severity on PTG, and social support seems to be an important factor when delivering interventions aimed at decreasing symptom severity and improving positive growth. LAY SUMMARY: Both social support and family function were positively associated with PTG. Providing sufficient perceived social support and enhancing family function promoted parents' positive psychological experience. Higher social support seemed to buffer the detrimental effect of symptom severity on PTG, and it could be an important intervention target for improving the psychological growth of parents of children with ASD.
35048265|a|Previous studies have demonstrated that individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are worse at recognizing facial expressions than are typically developing (TD) individuals. The present study investigated the differences in structural neural correlates of emotion recognition between individuals with and without ASD using voxel-based morphometry (VBM). We acquired structural MRI data from 27 high-functioning adults with ASD and 27 age- and sex-matched TD individuals. The ability to recognize facial expressions was measured using a label-matching paradigm featuring six basic emotions (anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, and surprise). The behavioural task did not find deficits of emotion recognition in ASD after controlling for intellectual ability. However, the VBM analysis for the region of interest showed a positive correlation between the averaged percent accuracy across six basic emotions and the grey matter volume of the right inferior frontal gyrus in TD individuals, but not in individuals with ASD. The VBM for the whole brain region under each emotion condition revealed a positive correlation between the percent accuracy for disgusted faces and the grey matter volume of the left dorsomedial prefrontal cortex in individuals with ASD, but not in TD individuals. The different pattern of correlations suggests that individuals with and without ASD use different processing mechanisms for recognizing others' facial expressions.
35048236|a|New technologies (NT) are increasingly used in Occupational Therapy (OT) interventions in people with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). We conducted a scoping review to describe OT interventions investigated in scientific literature which use NT in children and adolescents with ASD. Two authors independently searched the scientific databases PubMed, EMBASE, Scopus and Web of Science, carried out a peer-review screening of articles and extracted data. Twenty studies met the inclusion criteria. OT interventions lasted between 1 week and 12 months, consisted of between 1 session per day and 5 sessions per week, were carried out exclusively by an occupational therapist, and the most used NT was the computer (n = 12). The duration of the interventions and assessment measures used varied greatly between studies.
35048059|a|Oral diseases are a universal public health problem with serious health and economic burdens. These diseases are a major concern in the pediatric population specifically. In the United Arab Emirates (UAE), among all the diseases that affect children, oral diseases, particularly early childhood caries, are the most common despite improvement in the provision of oral health services. Enhancing oral health status is one of the key public health goals in the country. This current systematic review aims to summarize the available data on oral health among children and adolescents in the UAE over the past decade (2011-2021). The review was conducted following a predefined protocol and in concordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement. PubMed, the Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL) via EBSCO, EMBASE via Ovid, the Cochrane Library, and the Index Medicus for the Eastern Mediterranean Region (IMEMR) databases, and the gray literature were searched for original studies reporting on oral health in the pediatric population in the UAE, without applying any language restriction. Twenty-nine studies were included reporting on a total of 43,916 participants; they were mostly cross-sectional, and emirate-based; they were mostly limited by their setting and convenient sampling. Among the general pediatric population, results showed a high prevalence of dental caries across different emirates. Nevertheless, it was difficult to provide a predictable profile of caries, as risk factors were not well-explored and inconsistent across studies. Suboptimal oral hygiene practices were also prevalent, in addition to a low utilization of dental services. Furthermore, included studies showed a high level of oral problems in children with different disease (down syndrome, cerebral palsy, thalassemia, autism...) and special conditions (children in prison nurseries); yet, in general, treatment indices were lower than their healthy counterparts. This review suggests that dental caries is a major pediatric health problem in the UAE. Risk factors included higher consumption of snacks, being in public schools, lower maternal education level, and socioeconomic status. Nevertheless, risk factors were not well-explored and inconsistent across studies. Suboptimal oral hygiene practices and a low utilization of dental services were also identified, in addition to a high level of oral problems in children with different disease coupled with lower treatment indices in comparison with their healthy counterparts. This systematic review provides crucial information for planning and evaluating effective oral health programs, identifies gaps in the recent research in this field, and paves the way for preventive and interventional studies targeting oral health in pediatrics in the UAE. Immediate oral health promotion strategies are needed to address this public health problem early in its course by creating conditions that promote oral health, and increasing uptake of dental services. Intensifying research to draw temporal trends, understand the profile of childhood caries in the UAE, and explore cost-effective national community prevention programs are also needed.
35048025|a|Purpose: The purpose of this study was to compare the incidence of short and long term adverse behavioral effects of general anesthesia (GA) in healthy vs. moderate to severe autistic (ASD) children. Methods: Forty healthy and 37 ASD children, aged 3-17 years, undergoing GA for dental surgery participated in this study. Their anesthesia records were reviewed, and their parents answered telephone surveys to assess activity level, sleep disturbances, gastrointestinal disturbances, central nervous system effects, and respiratory depression. Three follow-up surveys were taken 8 h, 24 h, and 3 months post-surgery. Results: Four hundred fifty-five incidences of adverse behavioral effects occurred within 8 h post-surgery. Significantly more ASD patients had difficulty walking (P = 0.016) and nausea (P = 0.030), while more healthy children snored in the car ride home (P = 0.036) and talked about the dental surgery (P = 0.027). Three months post-discharge, sixASD patients acted in a way that concerned caregivers compared to 0 healthy patients, (P = 0.008). Incidence of adverse behavioral effects significantly decreased from 8 to 24 h overall. Conclusions: Most behavioral effects occur within 8 h post-surgery. There are potential long term adverse behavioral effects in ASD children from GA, but the chance is low and generally not long lasting.
35047232|a|Background: C1q/tumor necrosis factor-related protein-3 (CTRP3) has diverse functions: anti-inflammation, metabolic regulation, and protection against endothelial dysfunction. Methods: The plasma level of CTRP3 in autistic patients (n = 32) was compared to that in controls (n = 37) using ELISA. Results: CTRP3 was higher (24.7% with P < 0.05) in autistic patients than in controls. No association was observed between CTRP3 and the severity of the disorder using the Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS). A positive correlation between CARs and the age of patients was reported. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis demonstrated a low area under the curve (AUC) for all patients (0.636). Low AUCs were also found in the case of severe patients (0.659) compared to controls, but both values were statistically significant (P <= 0.05). Despite the small sample size, we are the first to find an association between CTRP3 and autism spectrum disorder (ASD).
35046931|a|Heterozygous mutations in JAK1 which result in JAK-STAT hyperactivity have been implicated in an autosomal dominant disorder that features multi-organ immune dysregulation. This study identifies another previously unreported heterozygous missense JAK1 mutation, H596D, in an individual with a unique autoinflammatory keratinization disease associated with early-onset liver dysfunction and autism. Using CRISPR-Cas9 gene targeting, we generated mice with an identical Jak1 knock-in missense mutation (Jak1 H595D/+;I596I/+;Y597Y/+ mice) that recapitulated key aspects of the human phenotype. RNA sequencing of samples isolated from the Jak1 H595D/+;I596I/+;Y597Y/+ mice revealed the upregulation of genes associated with the hyperactivation of tyrosine kinases and NF-kappaB signaling. Interestingly, there was a strong correlation between genes downregulated in Jak1 H595D/+;I596I/+;Y597Y/+ mice and those downregulated in the brain of model mice with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome that showed cognitive and behavioral deficits, such as autism spectrum disorders. Our findings expand the phenotypic spectrum of JAK1-associated disease and underscore how JAK1 dysfunction contributes to this autoinflammatory disorder.
35046876|a|Autistic students are more likely to drop out of university, while facing both challenges and opportunities within university environments. This study compared the experiences of autistic and non-autistic current United Kingdom students, in terms of thoughts about dropping out, burnout, mental health and coping, during the COVID-19 pandemic. Burnout was of particular interest as this is a relatively unexamined phenomenon for autistic students. Seventy autistic and 315 non-autistic students, completed a mixed methods questionnaire with standardized measures of burnout (personal and academic), mental health (depression, stress, and anxiety), and coping styles (adaptive and maladaptive). We also included qualitative questions about dropping out and COVID-19 experiences. We found autistic participants experienced higher rates of burnout and mental health symptoms and were more likely to have thought about dropping out. Reasons given for thinking about dropping out, for both groups, focused on poor mental well-being, doubts about university, and academic challenges. For autistic participants, further analyses did not identify specific predictors of thinking about dropping out, but for non-autistic participants, this was predicted by maladaptive coping styles and academic burnout. Academic and personal burnout predicted one another for autistic students, and age, maladaptive coping, autistic characteristics, stress, and anxiety additionally predicted burnout for non-autistic students. Similarities in experiences during the pandemic were noted, with both groups experiencing negative social implications, difficulties adjusting to emergency online learning, and poorer psychological well-being. Moving forward from COVID-19, universities must find ways to enhance both academic and social support, to enable equal opportunity within Higher Education for autistic students.
35046859|a|Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have an increased risk of adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) than typically developed (TD) children. Since multiple lines of studies have suggested that ACEs are related to myelination in the frontal lobe, an exposure to ACEs can be associated with white matter microstructural disruption in the frontal lobe, which may be implicated in subsequential psychological deficits after the adulthood. In this study, we investigated the relationship between ACEs and microstructural integrity on frontal lobe-related white matter tracts using diffusion tensor imaging in 63 individuals with ASD and 38 TD participants. Using a tractography-based analysis, we delineated the uncinate fasciculus (UF), dorsal cingulum (Ci), and anterior thalamic radiation (ATR), which are involved in the neural pathology of ASD, and estimated each diffusion parameter. Compared to the TD participants, individuals with ASD displayed significantly lower fractional anisotropy (FA) and higher radial diffusivity (RD) in the left ATR. Then, ASD individuals exposed to severe ACEs displayed higher RD than those exposed to mild ACEs and TD participants in the left ATR. Moreover, the severity of ACEs, particularly neglect, correlated with lower FA and higher RD in the left UF and ATR in individuals with ASD, which was not observed in TD participants. These results suggest that an exposure to ACEs is associated with abnormality in the frontal lobe-related white matter in ASD.
35046858|a|
35046845|a|Objective: Poor physiological regulation in response to threat is linked to multiple negative developmental outcomes including anxiety, which is highly prevalent and impairing in young children with neurodevelopmental disabilities like fragile X syndrome (FXS) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The present study contrasted cardiac startle response in pre-school-aged children with FXS, with and without ASD, to children with non-syndromic ASD (nsASD) and neurotypical controls (NT). The relationship of cardiac startle to non-verbal mental age (NVMA), ASD severity, and parent-reported anxiety was also examined. Method: Four age-matched groups of pre-school children participated including those with FXS without ASD (FXS-Only, n = 21), FXS with ASD (FXS+ASD, n = 17), nsASD (n = 42), and NT children (n = 27). Participants viewed a silent movie during which a single 200 ms 98-decibel white noise burst occurred. Cardiac activity was analyzed for pre-stimulus respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) and the inter-beat intervals (IBI) at the auditory stimulus and 10 s post-stimulus. The Spence Pre-school Anxiety Scale, Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule-2nd Edition, and Mullen Scales of Early Learning were examined in relation to startle response. Results: The nsASD group demonstrated heightened cardiac activity at the auditory stimulus and 10 s post-stimulus compared to the NT controls. Neither of the FXS groups showed differences from any other group. Higher pre-stimulus RSA was associated with reduced cardiac response across groups, while the relationship between cognitive ability and ASD severity to cardiac response varied between groups. Parent-reported anxiety was not associated with cardiac response for any group. Conclusion: These findings demonstrate group distinctions in cardiac responses to auditory startle. Although FXS and ASD share behavioral characteristics, the nsASD group showed a heightened cardiac startle response compared to the NT group that was not present in the FXS groups with or without ASD. Non-verbal mental age was associated with greater stimulus or post-stimulus reactivity for all groups except the FXS+ASD group, which showed no association between startle response and any clinical outcomes. Increased understanding of the relationship between physiological regulation and clinical outcomes will assist in identifying the timing and targets for effective interventions for individuals with neurodevelopmental disabilities.
35046478|a|Mothers alter their speech in a stereotypical manner when addressing infants using high pitch, a wide pitch range, and distinct timbral features. Mothers reduce their vocal pitch after early childhood; however, it is not known whether mother's voice changes through adolescence as children become increasingly independent from their parents. Here we investigate the vocal acoustics of 50 mothers of older children (ages 7-16) to determine: (1) whether pitch changes associated with child-directed speech decrease with age; (2) whether other acoustical features associated with child-directed speech change with age; and, (3) the relative contribution of acoustical features in predicting child's age. Results reveal that mothers of older children used lower pitched voices than mothers of younger children, and mother's voice pitch height predicted their child's age. Crucially, these effects were present after controlling for mother's age, accounting for aging-related pitch reductions. Brightness, a timbral feature correlated with pitch height, also showed an inverse relation with child's age but did not improve prediction of child's age beyond that accounted for by pitch height. Other acoustic features did not predict child age. Findings suggest that mother's voice adapts to match their child's developmental progression into adolescence and this adaptation is independent of mother's age.
35045904|a|BACKGROUND: Caregivers of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are sensitive to the internalisation of the stigma, known as affiliate stigma, resulting in reduced self-esteem, isolation and poor psychological well-being. AIMS: This study aims to validate the Greek version of the Affiliate Stigma Scale (ASS) among mothers of children with ASD. METHOD: The translated version of ASS in Greek was administered to 53 mothers of children newly diagnosed with ASD in two time periods: 1-6 months from diagnosis (time point 1) and 12 months from the initial assessment (time point 2). The control group consisted of 62 mothers of typically developing children. RESULTS: The ASS total mean score revealed a moderate level of stigma to the ASD group in both assessments. The reliability measures by item showed a satisfactory composite reliability (affective 0.828, cognitive 0.833, behaviour 0.857). Cronbach's alpha revealed that the estimated internal consistency was excellent (alpha = 0.888), and it found a high positive item-total correlation. Receiver operating characteristic analysis results indicated a statistically significant positive discrimination (area under the curve 0.849, P = 0.000) between the groups. The cut-off point was 31.00, with a sensitivity of 0.849 and a 1 - sensitivity of 0.258. CONCLUSIONS: The proposed version of the ASS has good psychometric properties and is valid and reliable for measuring affiliate stigma among caregivers of children with ASD in Greece. Health professionals can use it to assess and understand the stigma experienced by caregivers of children with ASD, and design appropriate interventions to reduce their affiliate stigma.
35045797|a|A goal of brain-computer-interface (BCI) research is to accurately classify participants' emotional status via objective measurements. While there has been a growth in EEG-BCI literature tackling this issue, there exist methodological limitations that undermines its ability to reach conclusions. These include both the nature of the stimuli used to induce emotions and the steps used to process and analyse the data. To highlight and overcome these limitations we appraised whether previous literature using commonly-used, widely-available, datasets is purportedly classifying between emotions based on emotion-related signals of interest and/or non-emotional artefacts. Subsequently, we propose new methods based on empirically-driven, scientifically-rigorous, foundations. We close by providing guidance to any researcher involved or wanting to work within this dynamic research field.
35045396|a|Yoga as a movement-based intervention is increasingly considered to improve the motor skills of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, there is little evidence of the effect of yoga on their motor skills. The current study aims to explore the effect of group yoga program on motor proficiency of children with ASD and feasibility of its inclusion in special schools. Forty-three children with ASD from four special schools were randomized into yoga (n = 23) and control (n = 20) group. A structured yoga program of 45 min for 12 weeks was delivered by trained yoga teachers who also tracked their daily responses. The Bruininks-Oseretsky Test of Motor Proficiency. Second Edition was used to assess both the groups pre- and postintervention. In conclusion, the study highlighted that yoga appears to have a positive impact on the gross motor rather than fine motor proficiency of children with ASD and is feasible to be delivered as group intervention in special schools.
35045339|a|It is well known that affective and pleasant touch promotes individual well-being and facilitates affiliative social communication, although the neural circuit that mediates this process is largely unknown. Here, we show that social-touch-like tactile stimulation (ST) enhances firing of oxytocin neurons in the mouse paraventricular hypothalamus (PVH) and promotes social interactions and positively reinforcing place preference. These results link pleasant somatosensory stimulation to increased social interactions and positive affective valence. We further show that tachykinin 1 (Tac1+) neurons in the lateral and ventrolateral periaqueductal gray (l/vlPAG) send monosynaptic excitatory projections to PVH oxytocin neurons. Functionally, activation of PVH-projecting Tac1+ neurons increases firing of oxytocin neurons, promotes social interactions, and increases preference for the social touch context, whereas reducing activity of Tac1+ neurons abolishes ST-induced oxytocin neuronal firing. Together, these results identify a dipeptidergic pathway from l/vlPAG Tac1+ neurons to PVH oxytocin neurons, through which pleasant sensory experience promotes social behavior.
35044968|a|PURPOSE OF REVIEW: There are currently no approved medications for the core symptoms of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and only limited data on the management of co-occurring mental health and behavioural symptoms. The purpose of this review is to synthesize recent trials on novel treatments in ASD, with a focus on research trends in the past 2 years. RECENT FINDINGS: No new pharmacologic agents received regulatory approval for use in ASD. Several large randomized controlled trials (RCTs) had negative or ambiguous results (e.g. fluoxetine, oxytocin). A cross-over RCT of an oral cannabinoid suggested possible benefits for disruptive behaviours. Two large-scale multicentre trials of bumetanide were terminated early for lack of efficacy. Multicenter trials using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation are underway. Recent meta-analyses indicate that specific behavioural and psychological interventions can support social communication and treat anxiety. Numerous novel treatment targets informed by biological mechanisms are under investigation. SUMMARY: Recent data support the use of behavioural and psychological interventions for social communication and anxiety in ASD; data are more limited regarding pharmacotherapy for core and associated symptoms. Next steps include replication of early findings, trials of new molecular targets, and the identification of novel biomarkers, including genetic predictors, of treatment response.
35044885|a|Purpose: Individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and Complex Communication Needs (CCN) require additional support from communication partners in order to communicate effectively. This study aimed to address a current gap in the literature by exploring communication partners' perspectives of their role. Method: A qualitative multiple case study design was used. The sample consisted of four participants who represented a diverse range of relationships with adults with ASD and CCN. Individual, in-depth, semi-structured interviews were conducted. Interview transcripts were analysed using the Framework Method of thematic analysis. Result: Four key themes were identified: (1) respecting the individual (2) flexibility (3) reaching beyond the dyad and (4) underlying beliefs. Due to the diverse range of relationships represented in this study, each case provided a unique perspective and therefore the results of each individual case were contrasted within each theme. Conclusion: The findings of this study highlight the crucial role that communication partners play in enabling interactions with adults who have ASD and CCN. Additionally, these findings provide preliminary evidence to support an expansion of the existing framework of communicative competence for individuals with CCN. Future research should aim to expand on these findings in order to investigate their generalisability.
35044095|a|L-type voltage-gated calcium channels are important regulators of neuronal activity and are widely expressed throughout the brain. One of the major L-type voltage-gated calcium channel isoforms in the brain is CaV 1.3. Mice lacking CaV 1.3 are reported to have impairments in fear conditioning and depressive-like behaviors, which have been linked to CaV 1.3 function in the hippocampus and amygdala. Genetic variation in CaV 1.3 has been linked to a variety of psychiatric disorders, including autism and schizophrenia, which are associated with altered motor learning, associative learning and social function. Here, we explored whether CaV 1.3 plays a role in these behaviors. We found that CaV 1.3 knockout mice have deficits in rotarod learning despite normal locomotor function. Deletion of CaV 1.3 is also associated with impaired gait adaptation and associative learning on the Erasmus Ladder. We did not observe any impairments in CaV 1.3 knockout mice on assays of anxiety-like, depression-like or social preference behaviors. Our results suggest an important role for CaV 1.3 in neural circuits involved in motor learning and concur with previous data showing its involvement in associative learning.
35044053|a|Visual search guides goal-directed action in humans and many other species, and it has been studied extensively in the past. Yet, no study has investigated the relative contributions of genes and environments to individual differences in visual search performance, or to which extent etiologies are shared with broader cognitive phenotypes. To address this gap, we studied visual search and general intelligence in 156 monozygotic (MZ) and 158 same-sex dizygotic (DZ) twin pairs. We found that different indexes of visual search performance (response latency and visual search efficiency) were moderately heritable. Phenotypic correlations between visual search and intelligence were small-to-moderate, and only a small proportion of the genetic variance in visual search was shared with genetic variance in intelligence. We discuss these findings in the context of the "generalist genes hypothesis" stating that different cognitive functions have a common genetic basis.
35043490|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a group of clinically heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorders sharing common features related to impaired social and communication abilities in addition to stereotyped behaviors. ASD patients present encephalic morphological, physiological, and biomolecular alterations with low levels of melatonin due to alterations in its pathways. Therefore, even if ASDs have traditionally been framed as behavioral disorders, several lines of evidence are accumulating that ASDs are characterized by certain anatomical and physiological abnormalities, including oxidative stress and inflammation in peripheral biomarkers, but likewise present in human brain tissue also characterized by alterations in synaptic remodeling and neuromodulation. Melatonin has also protective and antioxidant properties, so we can therefore hypothesize that alterations in melatonin's pathways may be one of the causes of the symptomatology of autism. The aim of the present study was to analyze the beneficial effect induced by melatonin administration and its possible mechanism of action in a transgenic mouse model of autism, immediately after weaning. The male mice were daily treated per os with melatonin (10 mg/Kg/day) or vehicle for 8 weeks starting from the sixth week of life. The antioxidant modulation, the GABAergic/glutamatergic impairment, and the synaptic remodeling in the prefrontal cortex have been evaluated. Social and repetitive behaviors were also evaluated. The behavioral results showed no statistical evidences, instead the immunohistochemical results indicated the ability of melatonin to promote the activity of antioxidant system, the GABAergic/glutamatergic equilibrium, and the synaptic remodeling. The results show that melatonin may be a possible adjuvant therapeutic strategy in ASDs.
35043482|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are a heterogeneous group of neurodevelopmental conditions whose shared core features are impairments in social interaction and communication as well as restricted patterns of behavior, interests, and activities. The significant and consistent male preponderance in ASD prevalence has historically affected the scientific knowledge of autism in females as regards, inter alia, the clinical presentation, the genetic architecture, and the structural brain underpinnings. Indeed, females with ASD are under-investigated as samples recruited for clinical research typically reflect the strong male bias of the disorder. In the last years, the study of the various aspects of sex/gender (s/g) differences in ASD is gaining increased clinical and research interest resulting in a growing number of investigations on this topic. Here, I review and discuss evidence emerged from epidemiological, clinical, and neuroimaging studies in the last decade focusing on s/g differences in children with ASD. These studies are the prerequisites for the development of assessment and treatment practices which take into consideration s/g differences in ASD. Ultimately, a better understanding of s/g differences aims at improving healthcare for both ASD males and females.
35043462|a|Neuropsychiatric and neurodevelopmental disorders such as major depressive disorder (MDD) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are complex conditions attributed to both genetic and environmental factors. There is a growing body of evidence showing that serotonergic signaling and mitochondrial dysfunction contribute to the pathophysiology of these disorders and are linked as signaling through specific serotonin (5-HT) receptors drives mitochondrial biogenesis. The serotonin transporter (SERT) is important in these disorders as it regulates synaptic serotonin and therapeutically is the target of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors which are a major class of anti-depressant drug. Human allelic variants of the serotonin transporter-linked polymorphic region (5-HTTLPR) such as the S/S variant, are associated with reduced SERT expression and increased susceptibility for developing neuropsychiatric disorders. Using a rat model that is haploinsufficient for SERT and displays reduced SERT expression similar to the human S/S variant, we demonstrate that reduced SERT expression modulates mitochondrial copy number and expression of respiratory chain electron transfer components in the brain. In the frontal cortex, genotype-related trends were opposing for males and females, such that reduced SERT expression led to increased expression of the Complex I subunit mt-Nd1 in males but reduced expression in females. Our findings suggest that SERT expression and serotonergic signaling have a role in regulating mitochondrial biogenesis and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production in the brain. We speculate that the sexual dimorphism in mitochondrial abundance and gene expression contributes to the sex bias found in the incidence of neuropsychiatric disorders such as MDD and ASD.
35042901|a|Shank proteins are major scaffolds of the postsynaptic density of excitatory synapses. Mutations in SHANK genes are associated with autism and intellectual disability. The effects of missense mutations on Shank3 function, and therefore the pathomechanisms are unclear. Several missense mutations in SHANK3 affect the N-terminal region, consisting of the Shank/ProSAP N-terminal (SPN) domain and a set of Ankyrin (Ank) repeats. Here we identify a novel SHANK3 missense mutation (p.L270M) in the Ankyrin repeats in patients with an ADHD-like phenotype. We functionally analysed this and a series of other mutations, using biochemical and biophysical techniques. We observe two major effects: (1) a loss of binding to delta-catenin (e.g. in the p.L270M variant), and (2) interference with the intramolecular interaction between N-terminal SPN domain and the Ank repeats. This also interferes with binding to the alpha-subunit of the calcium-/calmodulin dependent kinase II (alphaCaMKII), and appears to be associated with a more severe neurodevelopmental pathology.
35042394|a|LAY ABSTRACT: The purpose of this study was to identify influences on the implementation of a school-based, comprehensive program for autistic students. Influences from the community context, from within the school organization, and from features of the intervention itself were examined. The study took place in 39 elementary schools in a southeastern state in the United States. Transformational leadership style of the building principal, percentage of white students at the school (which was proposed as a broader community socioeconomic variable), and adequacy of coaching were all associated with implementation.
35042382|a|LAY ABSTRACT: It is difficult to measure language comprehension abilities in autistic children who have limited expressive language skills. Results from available assessments may underestimate autistic children's receptive language skills. The primary purpose of this study was to compare alternative modalities and stimuli used to measure receptive vocabulary skills in autistic children who are minimally verbal. This study compared participants' outcomes on three different receptive vocabulary assessment conditions: an assessment that used a low-tech stimulus book, a touchscreen assessment, and an assessment that used real-object stimuli. Twenty-seven students between the ages of 3 and 12 who had minimal verbal skills and a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder participated in this study. Results showed that participants' scores in the real-object assessment condition were significantly higher than in the low-tech condition and marginally higher than scores in the touchscreen condition. These results suggest real-object stimuli may provide a more robust measure of autistic children's receptive vocabulary skills than traditional low-tech picture stimuli. Although many direct standardized assessments use picture stimuli to measure word understanding, when assessing autistic individuals who have limited expressive language, real objects can be used in replacement of, or in addition to, picture stimuli.
35042285|a|OBJECTIVE: Purpose of the study was to identify the relationship among actual plasmatic levels of steroid hormones and behavioral manifestations in boys with autism and to assess the genetic contribution to these manifestations. METHODS: 172 boys with autism under 10 years of age and 135 neurotypical boys attended the study. ADI-R and ADOS-2 were used to evaluate the core symptom severities. Problem behavior was assessed using BPI-01 questionnaire. Levels of testosterone, estradiol, dehydroepiandrosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone-sulfate and sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) were measured in plasma of autistic boys. Three SNPs (in ESR1, SHBG, SRD5A2 genes) and one STR in AR gene (number of CAG repeats in first exon) were assessed. Hormonal levels and number of CAG repeats in AR gene were used for correlation analysis with behavioral measures. Genotype and allelic frequencies were compared among autistic and neurotypical boys. RESULTS: We found negative relationship among SHBG levels and restricted, repetitive behaviors (measured by ADOS-2) and positive relationship among actual testosterone levels and frequency of stereotyped behavior (measured by BPI-01). CONCLUSION: Actual levels of SHBG and testosterone are related to severities of restricted and repetitive behaviors in boys with autism. Mechanisms of action of these hormones in brain require further investigation.
35042182|a|BACKGROUND: Many children with autism and intellectual disability (ID) experience executive functioning (EF) difficulties. However, there is minimal research on EF skills in children with autism, ID, and co-occurring autism/ID in early childhood. AIMS: To address this gap in the research, we evaluated EF profiles using the BRIEF-P among early childhood children (2-5 years of age) with autism, ID, and co-occurring autism/ID. METHOD AND PROCEDURES: Participants in the current study were 87 children between the ages of 24 and 71 months (M = 46.8, SD = 12.7) diagnosed with autism (n = 24, 27.6 %), ID (n = 23, 26.4 %), or co-occurring autism/ID (n = 40, 46.0 %) that completed a comprehensive psychological evaluation at a university development center. We used a mixed Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) and between- and within-subjects ANOVAs as follow-up analyses. OUTCOMES AND RESULTS: Results suggested that early childhood children with autism, ID, and autism/ID may have unique EF skill profiles. Children with ID exhibited the most significant EF impairments and children with autism had the least. Working memory was the most impaired EF domain across all diagnostic groups. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Overall, our findings show that early childhood children with autism, ID, and autism/ID exhibit difficulties in EF skills. Children with ID exhibit the most significant EF impairments whereas children with autism show the least. However, regardless of diagnosis, working memory is the most impaired EF skill.
35042086|a|The Camouflaging Autistic Traits Questionnaire (CAT-Q) is an instrument recently developed and validated in English for measuring social camouflaging. While increasing research is focusing on camouflaging behaviours often used for masking autistic traits in social contexts, the CAT-Q remains the only self-report instrument in this field. We aimed to validate the Italian version of the CAT-Q, further testing its validity and reliability in a large Italian University population (N = 2439). We employed the Adult Autism Subthreshold Spectrum (AdAS Spectrum) for assessing autism spectrum conditions. The CAT-Q demonstrated excellent internal consistency and test-retest reliability, as well as strong correlations with the AdAS Spectrum. Our results confirm that the CAT-Q is a valuable instrument for evaluating social camouflaging.
35042017|a|Gilles de la Tourette syndrome (TS) is a common, childhood-onset psychiatric disorder characterized by persistent motor and vocal tics. It is a heterogeneous disorder in which the phenotypic expression may be affected by environmental factors, such as immune responses. Furthermore, several studies have shown that genetic factors play a vital role in the etiology of TS, as well as its comorbidity with other disorders, including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and autism spectrum disorder. TS has a complex inheritance pattern and, according to various genetic studies, several genes and loci have been correlated with TS. Genome-wide linkage studies have identified Slit and Trk-like 1 (SLITRK1) and histidine decarboxylase (HDC) genes, and candidate gene association studies have extensively investigated the dopamine and serotonin system genes, but there have been no consistent results. Moreover, genome-wide association studies have implicated several genetic loci; however, larger study cohorts are needed to confirm this. Copy number variations, which are polymorphisms in the number of gene copies due to chromosomal deletions or duplications, are considered another significant source of mutations in TS. In the last decade, whole genome/exome sequencing has identified several novel genetic mutations in patients with TS. In conclusion, more studies are needed to reveal the exact mechanisms of underlying TS, which may help to provide more information on the prognosis and therapeutic plans for TS.
35041714|a|A Social Story (SS) is a highly acceptable and widely used intervention by the autism community. Yet, inconsistent implementation of the intervention is reported to be one of the causes of variability in terms of outcome research, particularly in a naturalistic context. This study aimed to (1) investigate whether digitally-mediated social stories (SSs) can improve competence in developing and delivering a SS and thus contribute towards improved implementation, and (2) investigate the impact of the digitally-mediated SS on attitudes towards the SS intervention. Ninety-three participants took an initial pre-engagement survey. Forty-eight of these participants also complete a post-engagement survey. A pre-post design was utilised with the participants who completed both surveys. These 48 participants were invited to develop a digitally-mediated SS with the aim of exploring how digitally-mediated SSs impacted perceived competence and attitudes. Post-engagement data was collected two weeks after the pre-engagement data. Outcomes of this study indicate that both perceived competence and attitudes improved after engaging with digitally-mediated SSs. It is concluded that digitally-mediated SS not only impacted the integrity of how the intervention was delivered but also the beliefs in the participants' capabilities to develop and deliver a SS. Digitally-mediated SS, thus, has the potential to effectively support development and delivery whilst also addressing challenges related to intervention implementation in a naturalistic context.
35041646|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a heterogeneous condition that affects face perception. Evidence shows that there are differences in face perception associated with the processing of low spatial frequency (LSF) and high spatial frequency (HSF) of visual stimuli between non-symptomatic relatives of individuals with autism (broader autism phenotype, BAP) and typically developing individuals. However, the neural mechanisms involved in these differences are not fully understood. Here we tested whether face-sensitive event related potentials could serve as neuronal markers of differential spatial frequency processing, and whether these potentials could differentiate non-symptomatic parents of children with autism (pASD) from parents of typically developing children (pTD). To this end, we performed electroencephalographic recordings of both groups of parents while they had to recognize emotions of face pictures composed of the same or different emotions (happiness or anger) presented in different spatial frequencies. We found no significant differences in the accuracy between groups but lower amplitude modulation in the Late Positive Potential activity in pASD. Source analysis showed a difference in the right posterior part of the superior temporal region that correlated with ASD symptomatology of the child. These results reveal differences in brain processing of recognition of facial emotion in BAP that could be a precursor of ASD.
35040968|a|Importance: Despite indices of impaired neurodevelopment in children of mothers with eating disorders, it remains unclear whether these children are at increased risk of developing neuropsychiatric diseases. Objective: To evaluate the association between maternal eating disorders, whether preexisting or ongoing during pregnancy, and offspring neuropsychiatric disease risk. Design, Setting and Participants: This population-based prospective cohort study used the Swedish Medical Birth Registry and identified singleton births registered between from January 1, 1990, and December 31, 2012. Children of exposed mothers with eating disorders were matched with comparator children of mothers without diagnoses of eating disorders. To adjust for unmeasured shared familial factors, a cluster of exposed children with full maternal cousin comparators was identified. Follow-up was completed on December 31, 2017. Data were analyzed from August 31, 2020, to April 30, 2021. Exposures: Maternal eating disorder diagnosis. Main Outcomes and Measures: All children were followed up from 1 year of age for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and from 3 years of age for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The relative risk of ASD and ADHD was assessed among exposed children, stratified by eating disorder subtype and ongoing vs previous disease, adjusted for potential confounders, including parental socioeconomic status and comorbidities. Results: Among the 52 878 children included in the analysis, maternal eating disorder exposure (n = 8813) was associated with an increased risk of ADHD (hazard ratio [HR] for anorexia nervosa, 1.42 [95% CI, 1.23-1.63]; HR for bulimia nervosa, 1.91 [95% CI, 1.43-2.54]; and HR for unspecified eating disorder, 2.00 [95% CI, 1.72-2.32]) and ASD (HR for anorexia nervosa, 2.04 [95% CI, 1.58-2.63]; HR for bulimia nervosa, 2.70 [95% CI, 1.68-4.32]; and HR for unspecified eating disorder, 1.95 [95% CI, 1.49-2.54]). After adjustment for parental confounders, the risk of ADHD remained significantly increased, whereas the risk of ASD in children to mothers with bulimia nervosa was no longer significant. Ongoing anorexia nervosa was associated with a significantly higher risk of ADHD (HR, 2.52 [95% CI, 1.86-3.42]) and ASD (HR, 3.98 [95% CI, 2.49-6.27]) compared with previous disease (HRs, 1.26 [95% CI, 1.06-1.48] and 1.81 [95% CI, 1.38-2.38], respectively). Results based on the family cluster were similar to those of the main analysis for maternal exposure to anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Conclusions and Relevance: These findings suggest that children born to mothers with eating disorders, in particular disorders that were active during pregnancy, were at increased risk of developing ADHD and ASD. The association could not be fully explained by parental psychiatric comorbidities, and among children of mothers with anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, it could not be explained by unmeasured familial confounding.
35040692|a|
35040691|a|BACKGROUND: Studies have shown that air pollution exposures during pregnancy are associated with an increased risk of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in children, and the risk appears to be greater for boys. However, studies assessing gestational windows of susceptibility have been mostly limited by trimesters. OBJECTIVE: We identified sensitive windows of exposure to regional air pollution and risk of ASD and examined sex differences in a large birth cohort. METHODS: This population-based retrospective cohort study included 294,937 mother-child pairs with singleton deliveries in Kaiser Permanente Southern California (KPSC) hospitals from 2001 to 2014. Children were followed using electronic medical records until clinical ASD diagnosis, non-KPSC membership, death, or 31 December 2019, whichever came first. Weekly mean fine particulate matter [PM with an aerodynamic diameter of <=2.5mum (PM2.5)], nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and ozone (O3) pregnancy exposures were estimated using spatiotemporal prediction models. Cox proportional hazard models with distributed lags were used to estimate weekly pollutant exposure associations with ASD risk for the entire cohort, and separately for boys and for girls. Models were adjusted for child sex (for full cohort), maternal race/ethnicity, maternal age at delivery, parity, maternal education, maternal comorbidities, medical center, census tract median household income, birth year, and season. RESULTS: There were 5,694 ASD diagnoses (4,636 boys, 1,058 girls). Sensitive PM2.5 exposure windows associated with ASD were found early in pregnancy, statistically significant throughout the first two trimesters [1-27 wk of gestation, cumulative hazard ratio (HR)=1.14 [95% confidence interval (CI): 1.06, 1.23] per interquartile range (IQR) (7.4-mug/m3) increase]. O3 exposure during 34-37 wk of gestation was associated with increased risk [HR=1.06 (95% CI: 1.01, 1.11) per IQR (17.4 ppb) increase] but with reduced risk during 20-28 wk of gestation [HR=0.93 (95% CI: 0.89, 0.98)]. No associations were observed with NO2. Sex-stratified early gestational PM2.5 associations were stronger among boys [boys HR=1.16 (95% CI: 1.08, 1.26); girls HR=1.06 (95% CI: 0.89, 1.26)]. O3 associations in later gestation were observed only in boys [boys HR=1.10 (95% CI: 1.04, 1.16); girls HR=0.94 (95% CI: 0.84, 1.05)]. CONCLUSIONS: Exposures to PM2.5 in the first two gestational trimesters were associated with increased ASD risk in children, with stronger associations observed for boys. The role of O3 exposure on ASD risk merits further investigation. https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP9509.
35040592|a|Sensory features (i.e., atypical responses to sensory stimuli) are included in the current diagnostic criteria for autism spectrum disorder. Yet, large population-based studies have not examined these features. This study aimed to determine the prevalence of sensory features among autistic children, and examine associations between sensory features, demographics, and co-occurring problems in other areas. Analysis for this study included a sample comprised of 25,627 four- or eight-year-old autistic children identified through the multistate Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network (2006-2014). We calculated the prevalence of sensory features and applied multilevel logistic regression modeling. The majority (74%; 95% confidence interval: 73.5%-74.5%) of the children studied had documented sensory features. In a multivariable model, children who were male and those whose mothers had more years of education had higher odds of documented sensory features. Children from several racial and ethnic minority groups had lower odds of documented sensory features than White, non-Hispanic children. Cognitive problems were not significantly related to sensory features. Problems related to adaptive behavior, emotional states, aggression, attention, fear, motor development, eating, and sleeping were associated with higher odds of having documented sensory features. Results from a large, population-based sample indicate a high prevalence of sensory features in autistic children, as well as relationships between sensory features and co-occurring problems. This study also pointed to potential disparities in the identification of sensory features, which should be examined in future research. Disparities should also be considered clinically to avoid reduced access to supports for sensory features and related functional problems. LAY SUMMARY: In a large, population-based sample of 25,627 autistic children, 74% had documented differences in how they respond to sensation. We also identified significant associations of sensory features with adaptive behavior and problems in other domains. Sensory features were less common among girls, children of color, and children of mothers with fewer years of education, suggesting potential disparities in identification.
35040590|a|Scholars and activists debate whether people on the autism spectrum should access autism-specific services or general/inclusive/mainstream services. This article presents quantitative results from a mixed-methods survey of autistic adults and parents/guardians of autistic people in Canada, France, Germany, Italy, and the United States. Respondents reported categories of services used (autism-specific, mixed-disability, or general/inclusive/mainstream), satisfaction, and overall service preference. Most respondents preferred autism-specific services, followed by different categories of services for different service types. Demographic factors had little influence on overall service preferences. No significant differences were found between adults' and parents/guardians' overall service preferences. For parents/guardians, using autism-specific services was associated with a preference for autism-specific services. There were significant associations between the services respondents reported having previously used and their overall service preference. Parents/guardians in Italy and France reported lower satisfaction with many services. These results suggest that a preference for autism-specific services pervades different groups. While most respondents did endorse autism-specific services, the strong secondary preference for different service categories encourages providers and policy makers to attend to diverse needs. While satisfaction was generally middling to high, there remain areas for improvement, especially in general job training services. General services can use a Universal Design approach and collaborate with autism-specific and mixed-disability services to increase accessibility to diverse populations. The influence of previous service use on preferences suggests that providers can leverage strengths of existing services, leverage and create connections, and ask users about previous experiences to better address their expectations. LAY SUMMARY: This study asked autistic adults and parents/guardians of autistic people what they think about autism services. Most parents/guardians and adults liked services that focus on autism, but many parents/guardians and adults liked them for some things and not others. All services can ask people about services they used in the past and learn from the strengths of good services through Universal Design and working with other services.
35040130|a|Children and adolescents could benefit from the use of predictive tools that facilitate personalized diagnoses, prognoses, and treatment selection. Such tools have not yet been deployed using traditional statistical methods, potentially due to the limitations of the paradigm and the need to leverage large amounts of digital data. This review will suggest that a machine learning approach could address these challenges and is designed to introduce new readers to the background, methods, and results in the field. A rationale is first introduced followed by an outline of fundamental elements of machine learning approaches. To provide an overview of the use of the techniques in child and adolescent literature, a scoping review of broad trends is then presented. Selected studies are also highlighted in order to draw attention to research areas that are closest to translation and studies that exhibit a high degree of experimental innovation. Limitations to the research, and machine learning approaches generally, are outlined in the penultimate section highlighting issues related to sample sizes, validation, clinical utility, and ethical challenges. Finally, future directions are discussed that could enhance the possibility of clinical implementation and address specific questions relevant to the child and adolescent psychiatry. The review gives a broad overview of the machine learning paradigm in order to highlight the benefits of a shift in perspective towards practically oriented statistical solutions that aim to improve clinical care of children and adolescents.
35040001|a|This randomized controlled trial (NCT03889821) examined Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) in conjunction with the Parent-implemented Early Start Denver Model (P-ESDM). A previous report described improved metrics of parental distress (Weitlauf et al. in Pediatrics 145(Supplement 1):S81-S92, 2020). This manuscript examines child outcomes. 63 children with ASD (< 36 months) and their parents received 12 P-ESDM sessions. Half of parents also received MBSR. Longitudinal examination of whole sample means revealed modest improvements in autism severity, cognitive, and adaptive skills. There was not a significant time x group interaction for children whose parents received MBSR. Future work should examine more proximal markers of child or dyadic change to enhance understanding of the impact of providing direct treatment for parents as part of early intervention initiatives.
35039300|a|OBJECTIVES: To assess the cost-effectiveness of LEGO-based therapy compared with usual support. DESIGN: Cost-utility analysis alongside randomised control trial. SETTING: Mainstream primary and secondary schools in the UK. PARTICIPANTS: 248 children and young people (CYP) with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) aged 7-15 years. INTERVENTION: LEGO-based therapy is a group social skills intervention designed specifically for CYP with ASD. Through play, CYP learn to use the skills such as joint attention, sharing, communication and group problem-solving. CYP randomised to the intervention arm received 12 weekly sessions of LEGO-based therapy and usual support, while CYP allocated to control arm received usual support only. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Average costs based on National Health Service (NHS) and personal social services perspective and quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) measured by EQ-5D-Y over time horizon of 1 year were collected during the trial. Incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) was calculated, and non-parametric bootstrapping was conducted. The uncertainty around the ICER estimates was presented using cost-effectiveness acceptability curve (CEAC). A set of sensitivity analyses were conducted to assess the robustness of the primary findings. RESULTS: After adjustment and bootstrapping, on average, CYP in LEGO-based therapy group incurred less costs (incremental cost was -$251 (95% CI -$752 to $268)) and gained marginal improvement in QALYs (QALYs gained 0.009 (95% CI -0.008 to 0.028)). The CEAC shows that the probability of LEGO-based therapy being cost-effective was 94% at the willingness-to-pay threshold of $20 000 per QALY gained. Results of sensitivity analyses were consistent with the primary outcomes. CONCLUSION: Compared with usual support, LEGO-based therapy produced marginal reduction in costs and improvement in QALYs. Results from both primary and sensitivity analyses suggested that LEGO-based therapy was likely to be cost-effective. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ISRCTN64852382.
35039173|a|Findings from a population-based study using a sibling-matched analysis published in this issue of the British Journal of Anaesthesia indicate that epidural labour analgesia is not associated with an increased risk of autism spectrum disorder. These findings are consistent with those from three other population-based studies that used similar methodological approaches. Cumulatively, these robust, high-quality epidemiological data support the assertion that there is no meaningful association between epidural labour analgesia and autism spectrum disorder in offspring.
35039090|a|BACKGROUND: Identification of clinically significant genetic alterations involved in human disease has been dramatically accelerated by developments in next-generation sequencing technologies. However, the infrastructure and accessible comprehensive curation tools necessary for analyzing an individual patient genome and interpreting genetic variants to inform healthcare management have been lacking. RESULTS: Here we present the ClinGen Variant Curation Interface (VCI), a global open-source variant classification platform for supporting the application of evidence criteria and classification of variants based on the ACMG/AMP variant classification guidelines. The VCI is among a suite of tools developed by the NIH-funded Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen) Consortium and supports an FDA-recognized human variant curation process. Essential to this is the ability to enable collaboration and peer review across ClinGen Expert Panels supporting users in comprehensively identifying, annotating, and sharing relevant evidence while making variant pathogenicity assertions. To facilitate evidence-based improvements in human variant classification, the VCI is publicly available to the genomics community. Navigation workflows support users providing guidance to comprehensively apply the ACMG/AMP evidence criteria and document provenance for asserting variant classifications. CONCLUSIONS: The VCI offers a central platform for clinical variant classification that fills a gap in the learning healthcare system, facilitates widespread adoption of standards for clinical curation, and is available at https://curation.clinicalgenome.org.
35038851|a|Lurasidone is one of the newest antipsychotics approved for use in childhood. The review presents generalized data on the pharmacological profile of Lurasidone, preclinical and clinical studies of the drug with an analysis of the parameters of pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, clinical efficacy, tolerability and safety of therapy for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder in children. It also provides data on the off-lable use of Lurasidone in childhood for autism spectrum disorders, Tourette's syndrome, hypomania in the structure of bipolar affective disorder. The data on the efficacy of Lurasidone in a wide range of psychopathological disorders, including positive, negative, affective and cognitive domains, as well as a favorable tolerability profile of the drug, including long-term therapy, are presented.
35038844|a|OBJECTIVE: To evaluate effectiveness and safety of umbilical cord blood cells (UCBC) in children with ASD. MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study comprised 13 boys and 2 girls, mean age 7.0+-0.5 years (test group), and 9 boys and 1 girl, mean age 6.0+-1.3 years (control group) diagnosed with autism or autistic syndrome. UCBC were infused intravenously in a single dose of 250+-20 million cells, four times at 14+-3-day intervals. Dynamics of cognitive functions were assessed with WISC subscales, questionnaire Skvortsov Developmental Profile Survey and brainstem auditory evoked potentials (BAEPs) conducted before therapy and six months after the first injection. The dynamic of autistic symptoms was explored with CASD and ATEC questionnaires, fulfilled at the start of the study, 3 and 6 months later (test group) or at the start of the study, and 6 months later (control group). RESULTS: UCBC was well tolerated and caused no appreciable adverse effects. Observation revealed improvement in cognitive functioning and alleviation of autistic symptoms in patients of the test group six months after the first UCBC injection. Positive dynamics were more noticeable in the test group than in the control group receiving standard therapy. CONCLUSION: The use of UCBC is safe and might be effective in the complex therapy of autism.
35038841|a|OBJECTIVE: To study the relationship of N-acetylaspartate (NAA) metabolism and choline (Cl) metabolism in different parts of the brain based on magnetic resonance spectrography (1H-MRS) with clinical manifestations of autism spectrum disorders (ASD). MATERIAL AND METHODS: Twenty-two children (16 boys, 6 girls), aged 2-10 years, were studied. Russian-language adapted versions of the Autism Treatment Evaluation Checklist (ATEC) and the Nisonger Child Behavior Rating Form (NCBRF) were administered. The ratio of metabolites NAA/creatine (Cr), Cho/Cr, Cho/NAA in the prefrontal cortex, postcentral gyrus and temporal lobes was studied using 1H-MRS. RESULTS: The following correlations were found: 1) between the NAA/Cr value and the Sensory/Cognitive Awareness scale in the prefrontal cortex on the left (rho=0.479) and on the right (rho=0.483); the Health/Physical Behavior scale in the precentral gyrus on the left (rho=0.572) and on the right (rho=0.463); the Sociability scale in the temporal lobe on the left (rho=0.481) and on the right (rho=0.796); the Speech/Language/Communication scale in the right temporal lobe (rho=-0.552); 2) between the Cho/Cr value and the Adaptive Social scale in the postcentral gyrus on the left (rho=-0.466) and on the right (rho=-0.518); the Compliant/Calm scale in the prefrontal cortex on the right (rho=0.624) and on the left (rho=-0.541); 3) between the Cho/NAA ratio and the Speech/Language/Communication scale in the right pre-central (rho=-0.471) and post-central gyrus (rho=-0.507); the Self-Isolated/Ritualistic>> scale in the left (rho=-0.486) and right temporal lobe (rho=-0.596). CONCLUSIONS: Thus, the predominant localization of disorders of N-acetylaspartate metabolism in communication disorders (bilaterally in the temporal lobes), cognitive, behavioral and somatic manifestations (bilaterally in the prefrontal regions) was established. Increased CI metabolism has identified deficits in interaction skills in both postcentral gyrus, and reveals bilateral differences in the effect on behavioral control in the prefrontal cortex. The results confirm the previously established numerous patterns between abnormal activation of the prefrontal cortex and neuronal dysfunction in ASD. But unlike other studies, it was possible to trace these relationships within a narrower phenotype of disorders - atypical autism comorbid with psychomotor disinhibition.
35038840|a|The article analyzes the evolution of scientific views on autism in children and milestone changes in the international classification. The main issues related to conceptual, terminological and classification aspects are reflected. The reasons for the increase in the prevalence of autism spectrum disorders, terminological inconsistencies, and deviations from etiopathogenetic views on autism are discussed. The question is raised about the need to adapt the introduced ICD-11 practice or working practice for everyday practice and scientific research in Russia.
35038814|a|OBJECTIVES: To reveal the different clinical presentations of liver glycogen storage disease type IX (GSD IX), which is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous type of glycogenosis. METHODS: The data from the electronic hospital records of 25 patients diagnosed with liver GSD IX was reviewed. Symptoms, clinical findings, and laboratory and molecular analysis were assessed. RESULTS: Of the patients, 10 had complaints of short stature in the initial presentation additionally other clinical findings. Elevated serum transaminases were found in 20 patients, and hepatomegaly was found in 22 patients. Interestingly, three patients were referred due to neurodevelopmental delay and hypotonia, while one was referred for only autism. One patient who presented with neurodevelopmental delay developed hepatomegaly and elevated transaminases during the disease later on. Three of the patients had low hemoglobin A1C and fructosamine values that were near the lowest reference range. Two patients had left ventricular hypertrophy. Three patients developed osteopenia during follow-up, and one patient had osteoporosis after puberty. The most common gene variant, PHKA2, was observed in 16 patients, 10 variants were novel and six variants were defined before. Six patients had variants in PHKG2, two variants were not defined before and four variants were defined before. PHKB variants were found in three patients. One patient had two novel splice site mutations in trans position. It was revealed that one novel homozygous variant and one defined homozygous variant were found in PHKB. CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed that GSD IX may present with only hypotonia and neurodevelopmental delay without liver involvement in the early infantile period. It should be emphasized that although liver GSDIX is thought of as a benign disease, it might present with multisystemic involvement and patients should be screened with echocardiography, bone mineral densitometry, and psychometric evaluation.
35038626|a|BACKGROUND: Breast milk feeding (BMF) improved neurodevelopment in children born very preterm (VPT, <32 weeks of gestation), but knowledge about its effect on other mental health outcomes remains limited. OBJECTIVE: To estimate the association of BMF practices with behavioral and emotional problems at preschool age in children born VPT. METHODS: We studied 263 children born VPT during 2011-12 and enrolled in the Portuguese EPICE cohort. At the age of 3, information on BMF initiation and duration was collected and behavioral and emotional problems were assessed using the parents' completed Child Behavior Checklist 1.5-5 years (CBCL/11/2-5). Children were categorized for all CBCL/11/2-5 sub-scales and for Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM5)-oriented scales. Risk ratios were estimated to assess the association of BMF with subclinical/clinical problems, fitting a Poisson regression. RESULTS: Behavioral or emotional subclinical/clinical problems were found in almost 20% of children (11.8% in the clinical range). BMF was consistently associated with lower adverse behavioral and emotional outcomes, particularly risks of externalizing problems, somatic complaints, aggressive behavior, as well as autism spectrum and attention deficit/hyperactivity symptoms, although the magnitude of the unadjusted risks was attenuated by adjustment for relevant confounders and wider confidence intervals included the null. CONCLUSION: Lower exposure to BMF seemed to increase the risk of adverse behavioral and emotional outcomes at preschool age in children born VPT. These results raise questions about explanatory pathways and strengthen evidence underpinning BMF promotion for VPT children.
35038463|a|Repetitive motor behaviors are repetitive and invariant movements with no apparent function, and are common in several neurological and neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism spectrum disorders (ASD). However, the neuropathology associated with the expression of these abnormal stereotypic movements is not well understood, and effective treatments are lacking. The ketogenic diet (KD) has been used for almost a century to treat intractable epilepsy and, more recently, disorders associated with inflexibility of behavioral routines. Here, we show a novel application for KD to reduce an abnormal repetitive circling behavior in a rodent model. We then explore potential mediation through the striatum, as dysregulation of cortico-basal ganglia circuitry has previously been implicated in repetitive motor behavior. In Experiments 1 and 2, adult FVB mice were assessed for levels of repetitive circling across a 3-week baseline period. Mice were then switched to KD and repetitive circling was assessed for an additional 3 weeks. In Experiment 1, time on KD was associated with reduced repetitive behavior. In Experiment 2, we replicated these benefits of KD and assessed dendritic spine density in the striatum as one potential mechanism for reducing repetitive behavior, which yielded no differences. In Experiment 3, adult female circling mice were given a single administration of a dopamine D2 receptor antagonist (L-741,646) that was associated with reduced repetitive behavior over time. Future research will explore the relationship between KD and dopamine within basal ganglia nuclei that may be influencing the benefits of KD on repetitive behavior.
35037743|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterised by social communication difficulties. These difficulties have been mainly explained by cognitive, motivational, and emotional alterations in ASD. The communication difficulties could, however, also be associated with altered sensory processing of communication signals. Here, we assessed the functional integrity of auditory sensory pathway nuclei in ASD in three independent functional magnetic resonance imaging experiments. We focused on two aspects of auditory communication that are impaired in ASD: voice identity perception, and recognising speech-in-noise. We found reduced processing in adults with ASD as compared to typically developed control groups (pairwise matched on sex, age, and full-scale IQ) in the central midbrain structure of the auditory pathway (inferior colliculus [IC]). The right IC responded less in the ASD as compared to the control group for voice identity, in contrast to speech recognition. The right IC also responded less in the ASD as compared to the control group when passively listening to vocal in contrast to non-vocal sounds. Within the control group, the left and right IC responded more when recognising speech-in-noise as compared to when recognising speech without additional noise. In the ASD group, this was only the case in the left, but not the right IC. The results show that communication signal processing in ASD is associated with reduced subcortical sensory functioning in the midbrain. The results highlight the importance of considering sensory processing alterations in explaining communication difficulties, which are at the core of ASD.
35037687|a|Multiple evidence support the prenatal predisposition of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Nevertheless, robust data about abnormalities in fetuses later developing into children diagnosed with ASD are lacking. Prenatal ultrasound is an excellent tool to study abnormal fetal development as it frequently used to monitor fetal growth and identify fetal anomalies throughout pregnancy. We conducted a retrospective case-sibling-control study of children diagnosed with ASD (cases); their own typically developing, closest-in-age siblings (TDS); and typically developing children from the general population (TDP), matched by year of birth, sex and ethnicity to investigate the association between ultrasonography fetal anomalies (UFAs) and ASD. The case group was drawn from all children diagnosed with ASD enrolled at the Azrieli National Center of Autism and Neurodevelopment Research. Fetal ultrasound data from the fetal anatomy survey were obtained from prenatal ultrasound clinics of Clalit Health Services (CHS) in southern Israel. The study comprised 659 children: 229 ASD, 201 TDS, and 229 TDP. UFAs were found in 29.3% of ASD cases vs. only 15.9% and 9.6% in the TDS and TDP groups (aOR = 2.23, 95%CI = 1.32-3.78, and aOR = 3.50, 95%CI = 2.07-5.91, respectively). Multiple co-occurring UFAs were significantly more prevalent among ASD cases. UFAs in the urinary system, heart, and head&brain were the most significantly associated with ASD diagnosis (aORUrinary =2.08, 95%CI = 0.96-4.50 and aORUrinary = 2.90, 95%CI = 1.41-5.95; aORHeart = 3.72, 95%CI = 1.50-9.24 and aORHeart = 8.67, 95%CI = 2.62-28.63; and aORHead&Brain = 1.96, 95%CI = 0.72-5.30 and aORHead&Brain = 4.67, 95%CI = 1.34-16.24; vs. TDS and TDP, respectively). ASD females had significantly more UFAs than ASD males (43.1% vs. 25.3%, p = 0.013) and a higher prevalence of multiple co-occurring UFAs (15.7% vs. 4.5%, p = 0.011). No sex differences were seen among TDS and TDP controls. ASD fetuses were characterized by a narrower head and a relatively wider ocular-distance vs. TDP fetuses (ORBPD = 0.81, 95%CI = 0.70-0.94, and aOROcular-Distance = 1.29, 95%CI = 1.06-1.57). UFAs were associated with more severe ASD symptoms. Our findings shed important light on the abnormal multiorgan embryonic development of ASD and suggest fetal ultrasonography biomarkers for ASD.
35037652|a|Group B Streptococcus (GBS) is one of the most common bacteria isolated during human pregnancy. It is a leading cause of placental infection/inflammation, termed chorioamnionitis. Chorioamnionitis exposes the developing fetus to a high risk of organ injuries, perinatal morbidity, and mortality, as well as life-long neurobehavioral impairments and other non-neurological developmental issues. The two most frequent subtypes of GBS isolates from maternal and fetal tissues are serotypes Ia (13%-23%) and III (25%-53%). Our lab has developed and characterized a rat model of GBS-induced chorioamnionitis to study subsequent impacts on the central nervous system of the developing fetus and to understand underlying mechanistic aspects. This article presents the design as well as uses of the preclinical rat model, which closely reproduces the hallmark of GBS-induced chorioamnionitis in humans. This article aims to help scientists reproduce the experimental design as well as to provide support through examples of troubleshooting. The present model may also contribute to potential discoveries through uncovering causes, mechanisms, and novel therapeutic avenues, which remain unsettled in many developmental impairments arising from chorioamnionitis. Furthermore, the use of this model may be extended to the studies of perinatal non-neurological common and severe morbidities affecting, for instance, the retina, bowel, lung, and kidney. The main interest of this research is in the field of GBS-induced fetal neurodevelopmental impairments such as cerebral palsy (CP), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The rationale supporting this model is presented in this article, followed by procedures and results.
35037596|a|Using the stereotype content model and behavior from intergroup affect and stereotypes map model, we examined whether stereotype content directed toward specific disabilities conforms to the high warmth/low competence stereotype associated with "disabled people" or whether individual disabilities, or clusters, would elicit different stereotypes. Participants from the USA rated 12 disabilities on perceived warmth, competence, courage, emotions and behavioral tendencies. All disabilities, except schizophrenia and disability, were rated higher in warmth than competence. Four clusters emerged, varying on relative warmth, competence and courage. Pity was the highest rated emotion, and negative behavioral intentions were generally low. Perceived warmth predicted positive behavioral intentions, but mean ratings suggest actual help might be minimal. Results suggest some uniformity in stereotypes of different disabilities, but some variation in stereotypes indicates the need for targeted interventions to reduce prejudice and discrimination against disabled people.
35037520|a|LAY ABSTRACT: In an effort to increase access to intervention as early as possible for toddlers with autism spectrum disorder or signs thereof, many researchers have developed interventions that can be delivered by parents in their own homes. These parent-mediated approaches have gained a lot of research attention in recent years and have been found to be helpful in terms of parent and toddler learning. Several studies have used a rigorous research design (a randomized controlled trial) to show that parent-mediated intervention can work under ideal well-controlled conditions. To build on this evidence, we also need to examine whether parent-mediated interventions can be taught well through community service providers and delivered in more "real-world" conditions. This study used a research-community partnership to provide a parent-mediated intervention (called the Social ABCs) to 179 families (mean toddler age was 25 months; ranging from 14 to 34 months). Almost 90% of the families completed the 12-week program and 70% returned for a follow-up assessment 3 months later. Analyses showed that parents learned the strategies that were designed to help them support their toddlers' development. Also, toddlers made gains in their language, communication, and social skills. Importantly, parents' use of the strategies was related to toddlers' skill gains, suggesting that the use of the strategies made a difference for the toddlers. Findings support the use of parent-mediated intervention in this very young age group and suggest that such intervention approaches should be made available for community delivery.
35037485|a|
35037381|a|Atypical sensory responses are included in the diagnostic criteria of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Autistic individuals perform poorly during conditions that require integration across multiple sensory modalities such as audiovisual (AV) integration. Previous research investigated neural processing of AV integration in infancy. Yet, this has never been studied in infants at higher likelihood of later ASD (HR) using neurophysiological (EEG/ERP) techniques. In this study, we investigated whether ERP measures of AV integration differentiate HR infants from low-risk (LR) infants and whether early AV integration abilities are associated with clinical measures of sensory responsiveness. At age 12 months, AV integration in HR (n = 21) and LR infants (n = 19) was characterized in a novel ERP paradigm measuring the McGurk effect, and clinical measures of sensory responsiveness were evaluated. Different brain responses over the left temporal area emerge between HR and LR infants, specifically when AV stimuli cannot be integrated into a fusible percept. Furthermore, ERP responses related to integration of AV incongruent stimuli were found to be associated with sensory responsiveness, with reduced effects of AV incongruency being associated with reduced sensory reactivity. These data suggest that early identification of AV deficits may pave the way to innovative therapeutic strategies for the autistic symptomatology. Further replications in independent cohorts are needed for generalizability of findings.
35037185|a|This study aimed to identify factors, particularly positive parenting styles, associated with unmet dental needs, defined as no dental visit for the past 12 months, in children with developmental disabilities (DD). Participants included 263 primary caregivers of children with DD. Children exposed to less positive parenting styles were more than two times (aOR, 2.19, 95%CI, 1.12-4.32) more likely to have unmet dental needs. Children who were male (aOR, 1.88, 95%CI, 1.04-3.41), aged < 4 years (aOR, 2.95, 95%CI, 1.2-7.27) or aged >= 11 years (aOR, 2.65, 95%CI, 1.25-5.64), had higher illness severity (aOR, 2.04, 95%CI, 1.09-3.81), had primary caregivers with less than or equal to high school education (aOR, 2.45, 95%CI, 1.13-5.30) were also more likely to have unmet dental needs.
35037016|a|Health outcomes are frequently shaped by difficult to dissect inter-relationships between biological, behavioral, social and environmental factors. DNA methylation patterns reflect such multivariate intersections, providing a rich source of novel biomarkers and insight into disease etiologies. Recent advances in whole-genome bisulfite sequencing enable investigation of DNA methylation over all genomic CpGs, but existing bioinformatic approaches lack accessible system-level tools. Here, we develop the R package Comethyl, for weighted gene correlation network analysis of user-defined genomic regions that generates modules of comethylated regions, which are then tested for correlations with multivariate sample traits. First, regions are defined by CpG genomic location or regulatory annotation and filtered based on CpG count, sequencing depth and variability. Next, correlation networks are used to find modules of interconnected nodes using methylation values within the selected regions. Each module containing multiple comethylated regions is reduced in complexity to a single eigennode value, which is then tested for correlations with experimental metadata. Comethyl has the ability to cover the noncoding regulatory regions of the genome with high relevance to interpretation of genome-wide association studies and integration with other types of epigenomic data. We demonstrate the utility of Comethyl on a dataset of male cord blood samples from newborns later diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) versus typical development. Comethyl successfully identified an ASD-associated module containing regions mapped to genes enriched for brain glial functions. Comethyl is expected to be useful in uncovering the multivariate nature of health disparities for a variety of common disorders. Comethyl is available at github.com/cemordaunt/comethyl with complete documentation and example analyses.
35036992|a|Language impairments are frequent, severe, and of prognostic value in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Unfortunately, the evaluation of the efficacy of treatments targeting the language skills of those with ASD continues to be hindered by a lack of psychometrically sound outcome measures. Expressive Language Sampling (ELS) procedures offer a promising alternative to norm-referenced standardized tests for assessing expressive language in treatment studies. Until now, however, research on the validity and utility of ELS as outcome measures has been limited to administrations by a trained professional in a clinic setting and to use with English-speaking families. These limitations are a barrier for many families accessing the benefits of participation in treatment studies. The current study examines the feasibility of teaching native English-speaking parents (NESP) and native Spanish-speaking parents (NSSP) how to administer the ELS narrative task (ELS-N) to their sons and daughters with ASD (between ages 6 and 21) at home through telehealth-delivered procedures. The parent training was provided in the primary language of the participating parent (i.e., 11 NSSP and 11 NESP) and administered by the parent to the youth in the language that the parent reported to use to communicate with the youth at home (i.e., 9 Spanish and 13 English). Families were able to choose between using their own technology or be provided with the technology needed for participation. Of the 19 parents who completed the training, 16 learned to administer the ELS-N procedures. In addition, strong test-retest reliability and no practice effects over the 4-week interval were observed for ELS-N derived youth outcome measures (i.e., talkativeness, vocabulary, syntax, dysfluency, and intelligibility) for both NSSP and NESP. Results from this pilot study suggest that the home-based parent-implemented ELS-N procedures can be learned and administered at acceptable levels of fidelity by parents, with good test-retest reliability and limited practice effects observed in terms of outcome measures for youth with ASD. Implications for treatment studies and future directions are discussed.
35036525|a|Introduction: Standardized patient (SP) methodology has been used in health professional education to help students develop communication, deeper diagnostic reasoning, and critical thinking skills. Few examples demonstrate the use of SPs to practice difficult conversations with pediatric caregivers in the pediatric dentistry literature. The objective of this educational activity was to describe the implementation of three SPs in a pediatric dentistry course for second-year dental students. Methods: We developed three SP encounters covering interactions with caregivers of an infant with severe early childhood caries, an adolescent on the path to gender affirmation, and a child with autism and dental caries whose caregiver was resistant to fluoride- and silver-containing dental materials. We describe the case design process, rubric construction and calibration, student debriefing, and pandemic modifications. We evaluated the effectiveness of the implementation by thematic analysis of student reflections following each encounter using a qualitative descriptive framework. Results: Eighty-three students completed each encounter. Qualitative analysis showed that students preferred a more realistic encounter by having a child or other distraction present. Students relied on different elements of motivational interviewing depending on the objective of each encounter and the age of the patient. Overall, the SP encounters were well received by students and faculty as an alternative or supplement to traditional student evaluation methods. Discussion: We noted a number of lessons learned about implementing SP methodology in pediatric dental education. With these experiences now in place, future evaluations should measure student performance in the SP encounters against student performance during clinical care.
35036394|a|Fragile X syndrome (FXS), the most common inherited cause of intellectual disability, learning disability, and autism spectrum disorder, is associated with an increased prevalence of certain medical conditions including seizures. The goal of this study was to better understand seizures in individuals with FXS using the Fragile X Online Registry with Accessible Research Database, a multisite observational study initiated in 2012 involving FXS clinics in the Fragile X Clinic and Research Consortium. Seizure data were available for 1,607 participants, mostly male (77%) and white (74.5%). The overall prevalence of at least one seizure was 12%, with this rate being significantly higher in males than females (13.7 vs. 6.2%, p < 0.001). As compared to individuals with FXS without seizures, those with seizures were more likely to have autism spectrum disorder, current sleep apnea, later acquisition of expressive language, more severe intellectual disability, hyperactivity, irritability, and stereotyped movements. The mean age of seizure onset was 6.4 (SD 6.1) years of age with the great majority (>80%) having onset of seizures which was before 10. For those with epilepsy, about half (52%) had seizures for more than 3 years. This group was found to have greater cognitive and language impairment, but not behavioral disruptions, compared with those with seizures for <3 years. Antiepileptic drugs were more often used in males (60.6%) than females (34.8%), and females more often required more than one medication. The most commonly used anticonvulsants were oxcarbazepine, valproic acid, lamotrigine, and levetiracetam. The current study is the largest and first longitudinal study ever conducted to describe seizures in FXS. Overall, this study confirms previous reports of seizures in FXS and extends previous findings by further defining the cognitive and behavioral phenotype of those with epilepsy in FXS. Future studies should further investigate the natural history of seizures in FXS and the characteristics of seizures in FXS in adulthood.
35035353|a|Background: There have been previous reports of enhanced sympathoexcitation in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, there has been no formal investigation of autonomic dysfunction in ASD. Also, the joint hypermobile form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (hE-DS) that maybe overrepresented in ASD and orthostatic related autonomic dysfunction. This study examined the comorbidity of ASD, autonomic dysfunction and hE-DS in two UK autonomic national referral centers. Proven, documented and globally accepted clinical autonomic investigations were used to assess neuro-cardiovascular autonomic function in a cohort of ASD subjects and in age-matched healthy controls. Methods: Clinical data from 28 referrals with a confirmed diagnosis of ASD over a 10-year period were compared with 19 age-matched healthy controls. Autonomic function was determined using methods established in the centers previously described in detail. Results: 20/28 ASD had a diagnosed autonomic condition; 9 had the postural tachycardia syndrome (PoTS), 4 PoTS and vasovagal syncope (VVS), 3 experienced presyncope, 1 essential hyperhidrosis, 1 orthostatic hypotension, 1 VVS alone and 1 a combination of PoTS, VVS and essential hyperhidrosis. 16/20 ASD with autonomic dysfunction had hE-DS. In ASD, basal heart rate and responses to orthostatic tests of autonomic function were elevated, supporting previous findings of increased sympathoexcitation. However, sympathetic vasoconstriction was impaired in ASD. Conclusion: Intermittent neuro-cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction affecting heart rate and blood pressure was over-represented in ASD. There is a strong association with hE-DS. Autonomic dysfunction may further impair quality of life in ASD, particularly in those unable to adequately express their experience of autonomic symptoms.
35034726|a|Dendritic spines are small protrusions stemming from the dendritic shaft that constitute the primary specialization for receiving and processing excitatory neurotransmission in brain synapses. The disruption of dendritic spine function in several neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases leads to severe information-processing deficits with impairments in neuronal connectivity and plasticity. Spine dysregulation is usually accompanied by morphological alterations to spine shape, size and/or number that may occur at early pathophysiological stages and not necessarily be reflected in clinical manifestations. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is one such group of diseases involving changes in neuronal connectivity and abnormal morphology of dendritic spines on postsynaptic neurons. These alterations at the subcellular level correlate with molecular changes in the spine proteome, with alterations in the copy number, topography, or in severe cases in the phenotype of the molecular components, predominantly of those proteins involved in spine recognition and adhesion, reflected in abnormally short lifetimes of the synapse and compensatory increases in synaptic connections. Since cholinergic neurotransmission participates in the regulation of cognitive function (attention, memory, learning processes, cognitive flexibility, social interactions) brain acetylcholine receptors are likely to play an important role in the dysfunctional synapses in ASD, either directly or indirectly via the modulatory functions exerted on other neurotransmitter receptor proteins and spine-resident proteins.
35034602|a|BACKGROUND: Social communication is a key area of difficulty in fragile X syndrome (FXS) and there are not yet adequate outcome measurement tools. Appropriate outcome measures for FXS have been identified as a key area of research interest in order to evaluate future therapeutic trials. The Brief Observation of Social Communication Change-Minimally Verbal (BOSCC-MV), an outcome measure with strong psychometrics developed for autism spectrum disorder, has promise as an outcome measure to assess social communication change with FXS participants. METHODS: We examined the BOSCC-MV via central coders in this multi-site-trial to assess its appropriateness for FXS. Eighteen minimally verbal males ages 3-12 years were enrolled and assessed on two consecutive days and 7 participants completed a third visit 6 months later. We examined test-retest reliability, inter-rater reliability, and both convergent and divergent validity with standard clinical measures including the Autism Diagnostic and Observation Schedule-2, Vineland 3, Social Responsiveness Scale, and the Aberrant Behavior Checklist. RESULTS: The BOSCC-MV in FXS demonstrated strong inter-rater and test-retest reliability, comparable to previous trials in idiopathic ASD. Strong convergent validity was found with Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule-2 and Vineland-3. Divergent validity was demonstrated between BOSCC-MV and unrelated measures. CONCLUSIONS: The BOSCC-MV shows promise as a FXS social communication outcome measure, warranting further large-scale evaluation.
35034571|a|BACKGROUND: Recent studies have highlighted a role for trace elements and toxic metals across neurodevelopmental disorders, including developmental stuttering, Autistic Spectrum Disorders (ASD), and Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). However, these environmental influences have yet to be explored in relation to Developmental Language Disorder (DLD). METHODS: Elemental hair composition of seven elements; zinc (64Zn), magnesium (26Mg), iron (57Fe), potassium (39K), aluminum (27Al), lead (208Pb), and barium (138Ba) were analyzed in hair samples from 35 children affected by DLD and 35 controls with typical language development (TLD) using both inductive coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) and inductive coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS). RESULTS: The concentration of 64Zn was significantly lower in the hair of DLD group compared to the TLD control group. All other elements showed similar levels between cases and controls. This pilot study demonstrates the utility of trace elements and toxic metals screening in relation to language disorders and the use of hair samples in such investigations. CONCLUSION: The finding that zinc levels differed between cases and controls could represent a clinically relevant result and should be replicated in larger sample size across time. A wider battery of related elements will help to better understand the role of trace elements and toxic metals in DLD.
35034564|a|Nutrition is fundamental for brain development, but relatively little is known about water-soluble vitamin (WSV) levels and the effect of supplementation on psychiatry symptoms in children and adolescents (CAD) with psychiatric disorders. Our team systematically reviewed all studies concerning WSV abnormalities or supplementation in CAD with any psychiatric disorder. We searched for original studies published between 1990 and 15/05/2020 which were not based on retrospective chart review and which included WSV blood level measurements or investigated the effect of WSV supplementation on psychiatric symptoms in psychiatric patients aged 18 or under. Forty-two articles were included, 69% of which (N = 29) examined Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD), with most of these assessing folate or vitamin B12 supplementation (N = 22, 75.9% of ASD studies). Meta-analyses showed significantly lower vitamin B12 levels in ASD and ADHD patients vs. healthy controls (HC), while folate levels were higher in ADHD patients vs. HC. Most of the studies (9/10, 90%) showed a decrease in symptoms as measured by clinical scales after supplementation. There was significant heterogeneity between the studies, however many found different types of vitamin abnormalities in CAD with psychiatric disorders.
35034510|a|OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of neurocognitive training methods on targeted cognitive functions in children and adolescent with ADHD. METHOD: A pragmatic four-arm randomized controlled trial compared two types of neurofeedback (Slow Cortical Potential and Live Z-score) and Working-memory training (WMT) with treatment as usual. N = 202 participants with ADHD aged 9 to 17 years were included. A battery of cognitive function tests was completed pretreatment, posttreatment, and after 6-months. RESULTS: The effects of WMT on spatial and verbal working-memory were superior to neurofeedback and treatment as usual at posttreatment, but only partially sustained at follow-up. No other consistent effects were observed. We found no clear indications that effects were moderated by ADHD presentation, ongoing medication, age, or sex. CONCLUSION: The sustained effects of neurocognitive training on cognitive functioning in children and adolescents with ADHD may be limited. Future research should focus on more personalized forms of neurocognitive training.
35034115|a|Converging evidence supports that a collection of brain regions is functionally or anatomically abnormal in autistic subjects. Structural covariance networks (SCNs) representing patterns of coordinated regional maturation are widely used to study abnormalities associated with neurodisorders. However, the possible developmental changes of SCNs in autistic individuals during the first 2 postnatal years, which features dynamic development and can potentially serve as biomarkers, remain unexplored. To fill this gap, for the first time, SCNs of cortical thickness and surface area were constructed and investigated in infants at high familial risk for autism and typically developing infants in this study. Group differences of SCNs emerge at 12 months of age in surface area. By 24 months of age, the autism group shows significantly increased integration, decreased segregation, and decreased small-worldness, compared with controls. The SCNs of surface area are deteriorated and shifted toward randomness in autistic infants. The abnormal brain regions changed during development, and the group differences of the left lateral occipital cortex become more prominent with age. These results indicate that autism has more significant influences on coordinated development of surface area than that of cortical thickness and the occipital cortex maybe an important biomarker of autism during infancy.
35033774|a|TAM receptor family belongs to receptor tyrosine kinases (TAMRTKs). It includes three receptors; Tyro-3, Axl and Mer. TAMRTKs has a great role in resolution of inflammation due to their role in clearance of apoptotic cells by macrophages. Dysregulated TAM signaling pathways are associated with many autoimmune diseases and chronic inflammatory disorders. Autism may be an autoimmune disease in some patients. This work was the first study that investigated serum levels of the soluble ectodomain shed TAMRTKs in a group of autistic children. Serum levels of TAMRTKs were measured by ELISA in 30 autistic children aged between 3.5 and 11 years and 30 age and sex-matched healthy control children. Serum levels of TAMRTKs were significantly higher in autistic children than healthy control children (P < 0.001). Patients with severe autism had significantly higher serum levels of TAMRTKs than patients with mild to moderate autism (P < 0.01). In addition, there were significant positive correlations between scores of the Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) and serum levels of TAMRTKs in autistic patients, (P < 0.01). In conclusions, serum levels of TAMRTKs were up-regulated in autistic children with significant positive correlations with the degree of the disease severity. This initial report requires further studies to investigate the relationship between TAMRTKs and autism.
35033183|a|OBJECTIVES: Limited studies were found to investigate the occupational performance of autistic children and their parents' quality of life. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate occupational performance of children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and QoL of their mothers. RESULTS: In this study, 88 participants were selected from autism centers in Arak, Iran, 2020. The Canadian Occupational Performance Measure (COPM) and the parent version of Quality of Life in Autism Questionnaire (QoLA-P) were used to assess the occupational performance of ASD children and their mothers QoL. QoLA-P consists of parts A which is related to the quality of life and part-B related to the problems that these children have and are related to the parents or their caregivers. Regarding occupational performance, the first priority of mothers is self-care with frequency 64.8%. The finding suggested a significant correlation between total function score of COPM and the score of part-A (r = 0.227, p = 0.033) of QoLA-P. Also, the results revealed a significant correlation between the total satisfaction score of COPM and the score of part-A (r = 0.236, p = 0.026) and part-B of QoLA-P questionnaire (r = 0.231, p = 0.030). The mothers' first priority is self-care and, the total satisfaction and function score of COPM showed a significant correlation with mothers' QoL.
35033068|a|BACKGROUND: The Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) is the leading national clinical guideline producer in Scotland. Improved design and dissemination of guidelines produced for the public can empower people to take an active role in self-management and shared decision-making. The public version of the guideline examined covered getting assessed and diagnosed with autism, and approaches that can help. The aim of this study was to test a public version of a guideline for the parents of children and young people with autism, implement improvements, and identify what works in making it usable and accessible. METHODS: We recruited mothers from across Scotland. User testing involved formal 'think aloud' semi-structured interviews that guided users through the booklet. Interviews took place individually and were recorded and transcribed. Key findings were identified and themed using the honeycomb user experience model. RESULTS: Fourteen user-testing interviews were conducted. Facilitators for usability and desirability of the guideline included the chunking of text, consistent use of colour and boxes to highlight important information. Simple language, written in a tone of partnership, helped to engage mothers. Value arose from the guidelines ability to explain the process of diagnosis and make mothers feel empowered in their relationships with healthcare professionals. There was a lack of consensus on the usefulness of rating the strength of evidence and recommendations. CONCLUSION: There was a marked similarity between what was important to the mothers and what has been found to be important to other groups. The involvement of service users and carers in the guidelines development was key to its credibility. One size does not fit all in presenting evidence-based recommendations to the public and it is a challenge to provide sufficient information while avoiding information overload. Recommendations and evidence levels are suitable for use in public versions, but these should be kept as simple as possible.
35032947|a|BACKGROUND: Rigidity contributes to severity and functional impairment in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). There is an unmet need for a valid, reliable, and sensitive outcome measure to assess rigidity in ASD. OBJECTIVE: To develop and validate the Montefiore-Einstein Rigidity Scale-Revised (MERS-R) to assess the Behavioral Rigidity Domain (BRD), Cognitive Rigidity Domain (CRD), and Protest Domain (PD). MATERIALS AND METHODS: The MERS-R was administered to 93 individuals with ASD (children and adults, high and low IQ) at baseline, Week 2, and Week 12. Internal consistency was assessed for domain scores, Total Rigidity Composite (TRC = BRD + CRD), and Total Composite (TC = BRD + CRD + PD) with Cronbach's alpha. Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) assessed test-retest reliability from baseline to weeks 2 and 12. Pearson's correlations assessed the relationship between the MERS-R and age, sex, and IQ. Convergent validity assessed the correlation of MERS-R scores to the Children's Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale-ASD (CY-BOCS-ASD). RESULTS: Good internal consistency was demonstrated for the BRD, PD, TRC and TC (Cronbach's alpha = 0.83, 0.88, 0.82, and 0.89, respectively) and adequate internal consistency for the CRD (alpha = .72). Good or excellent test-test reliability was demonstrated over two weeks (ICC: 0.66 .79), and fair or good reliability over 12 weeks (ICC: 0.56-66). MERS-R scores did not differ by age, sex, or IQ (p: 0.16 .99) with the exception that higher PD scores were associated with younger age (correlation = -0.25, p = 0.01). Significant convergent validity was demonstrated between all MERS-R scores and the CY-BOCS-ASD (p < 0.0001). DISCUSSION: The MERS-R demonstrated internal consistency, test-retest reliability, convergent validity and applicability to autistic children and adults of different sexes and IQ levels. It is a valid, sensitive, and reliable instrument to measure behavioral and cognitive rigidity in ASD.
35032783|a|BACKGROUND: The Mullen Scales of Early Learning (MSEL) is a standardized comprehensive developmental assessment tool for children aged 0-68 months. However, few Asia-based studies have explored cultural and linguistic adaptations of the MSEL or investigated its psychometric properties in populations with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). AIMS: This study evaluated the reliability and validity of the MSEL-Taiwan version (MSEL-T) for Taiwanese children with ASD, global developmental delay (GDD), and typical development (TD). METHODS AND PROCEDURES: The MSEL items were translated and modified according to the language and culture in Taiwan. In total, 191 children (ASD, 69; GDD, 36; and TD, 86) aged 19-68 months were assessed using the MSEL-T and Peabody Developmental Motor Scales 2 (PDMS-2) at enrollment, followed by the assessments of Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale-Chinese version (VABS-C) at the age of 36 months or later. OUTCOMES AND RESULTS: All subscales were verified to have good interrater reliability and internal consistency, and subscale scores indicated moderate to high correlations with PDMS-2 and VABS-C scores. Significant differences in MSEL-T scores were observed between same-aged pairs of children with TD and GDD and between pairs of children with TD and ASD. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: The findings provide evidence of validity and reliability of the MSEL-T. And it is suggested that the culturally and linguistically adapted MSEL-T is a good tool for the clinical assessment of children with and without ASD.
35032300|a|Managing Eating Aversions and Limited Variety (MEAL) Plan is a structured parent-mediated intervention for children with autism spectrum disorder and moderate food selectivity. Our previously reported group-based clinical trial revealed a positive treatment response rate of 47.3%. Although encouraging, this response rate raises questions about factors that may affect treatment outcomes. Here, we examine the impact of child and parent characteristics and feeding behaviors on treatment response. Higher maternal education and higher child communication abilities at baseline were associated with positive treatment response. Improvement in sitting at the table and reductions in disruptive mealtime behavior promoted treatment success. Results also suggest that individually delivered MEAL Plan may offer more flexibility than group-based intervention for some parents.
35032292|a|Relative to children without autism spectrum disorder (ASD), children with ASD experience elevated sleep problems that can contribute to behavioral comorbidities. This study explored the interaction between psychophysiology and sleep to determine which children with ASD may be at risk for, or resilient to, effects of poor sleep on daytime behavior. Participants included 48 children (aged 6-10 years) with ASD. Measures of sympathetic nervous system activity (electrodermal activity; EDA) were collected during a baseline and in response to a laboratory challenge task. Parents reported on their children's sleep problems and behavioral functioning, including broad externalizing symptoms and situational noncompliance, using standardized questionnaires and a clinical interview. EDA moderated the significant positive associations between sleep problems and both behavioral outcomes. The link between sleep problems and broad externalizing symptoms and situational noncompliance was positive and significant in the context of lower baseline EDA and nonsignificant in the context of higher baseline EDA. Sleep problems also interacted with EDA reactivity in predicting situational noncompliance, but not broad externalizing symptoms. Findings highlight the complex interplay among sleep, daytime behavior, and psychophysiology in children with ASD. Results are interpreted in the context of differential susceptibility and dual-risk frameworks. This study underscores the importance of high-quality sleep for children with ASD, especially those with the biological sensitivity or vulnerability factors (i.e., EDA) identified in this study. Clinical implications are discussed, and directions for future research are provided.
35031056|a|BACKGROUND: Although visual abnormalities are considered common in individuals with autism spectrum disorders, the associated electrophysiological markers have remained elusive. One impediment has been that methodological challenges often preclude testing individuals with low-functioning autism (LFA). METHODS: In this feasibility and pilot study, we tested a hybrid visual evoked potential paradigm tailored to individuals with LFA that combines passively presented visual stimuli to elicit scalp-recorded evoked responses with a behavioral paradigm to maintain visual attention. We conducted a pilot study to explore differences in visual evoked response patterns across three groups: individuals with LFA, with high-functioning autism (HFA), and with typical development. RESULTS: All participants with LFA met criteria for study feasibility by completing the recordings and producing measurable cortical evoked waveform responses. The LFA group had longer (delayed) cortical response latencies on average as compared with the HFA and typical development groups. We also observed group differences in visually induced alpha spectral power: the LFA group showed little to no prestimulus alpha activity in contrast to the HFA and typical development groups that showed increased prestimulus alpha activity. This observation was confirmed by the bootstrapped confidence intervals, suggesting that the absence of prestimulus alpha power may be a potential electrophysiological marker of LFA. CONCLUSION: Our results confirm the utility of tailoring visual electrophysiology paradigms to individuals with LFA in order to facilitate inclusion of individuals across the autism spectrum in studies of visual processing.
35030990|a|BACKGROUND: The genetic disorder tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is frequently accompanied by the development of neuropsychiatric disorders, including autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability, with varying degrees of impairment. These co-morbidities in TSC have been linked to the structural brain abnormalities, such as cortical tubers, and recurrent epileptic seizures (in 70-80% cases). Previous transcriptomic analysis of cortical tubers revealed dysregulation of genes involved in cell adhesion in the brain, which may be associated with the neurodevelopmental deficits in TSC. In this study we aimed to investigate the expression of one of these genes - cell-adhesion molecule contactin-3. METHODS: Reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction for the contactin-3 gene (CNTN3) was performed in resected cortical tubers from TSC patients with drug-resistant epilepsy (n = 35, age range: 1-48 years) and compared to autopsy-derived cortical control tissue (n = 27, age range: 0-44 years), as well as by western blot analysis of contactin-3 (n = 7 vs n = 7, age range: 0-3 years for both TSC and controls) and immunohistochemistry (n = 5 TSC vs n = 4 controls). The expression of contactin-3 was further analyzed in fetal and postnatal control tissue by western blotting and in-situ hybridization, as well as in the SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cell line differentiation model in vitro. RESULTS: CNTN3 gene expression was lower in cortical tubers from patients across a wide range of ages (fold change = - 0.5, p < 0.001) as compared to controls. Contactin-3 protein expression was lower in the age range of 0-3 years old (fold change = - 3.8, p < 0.001) as compared to the age-matched controls. In control brain tissue, contactin-3 gene and protein expression could be detected during fetal development, peaked around birth and during infancy and declined in the adult brain. CNTN3 expression was induced in the differentiated SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells in vitro (fold change = 6.2, p < 0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Our data show a lower expression of contactin-3 in cortical tubers of TSC patients during early postnatal period as compared to controls, which may affect normal brain development and might contribute to neuropsychiatric co-morbidities observed in patients with TSC.
35030553|a|OBJECTIVES: This study examined whether remote microphone (RM) systems improved listening-in-noise performance in youth with autism. We explored effects of RM system use on both listening-in-noise accuracy and listening effort in a well-characterized sample of participants with autism. We hypothesized that listening-in-noise accuracy would be enhanced and listening effort reduced, on average, when participants used the RM system. Furthermore, we predicted that effects of RM system use on listening-in-noise accuracy and listening effort would vary according to participant characteristics. Specifically, we hypothesized that participants who were chronologically older, had greater nonverbal cognitive and language ability, displayed fewer features of autism, and presented with more typical sensory and multisensory profiles might exhibit greater benefits of RM system use than participants who were younger, had less nonverbal cognitive or language ability, displayed more features of autism, and presented with greater sensory and multisensory disruptions. DESIGN: We implemented a within-subjects design to investigate our hypotheses, wherein 32 youth with autism completed listening-in-noise testing with and without an RM system. Listening-in-noise accuracy and listening effort were evaluated simultaneously using a dual-task paradigm for stimuli varying in complexity (i.e., syllable-, word-, sentence-, and passage-level). In addition, several putative moderators of RM system effects (i.e., sensory and multisensory function, language, nonverbal cognition, and broader features of autism) on outcomes of interest were evaluated. RESULTS: Overall, RM system use resulted in higher listening-in-noise accuracy in youth with autism compared with no RM system use. The observed benefits were all large in magnitude, although the benefits on average were greater for more complex stimuli (e.g., key words embedded in sentences) and relatively smaller for less complex stimuli (e.g., syllables). Notably, none of the putative moderators significantly influenced the effects of the RM system on listening-in-noise accuracy, indicating that RM system benefits did not vary according to any of the participant characteristics assessed. On average, RM system use did not have an effect on listening effort across all youth with autism compared with no RM system use but instead yielded effects that varied according to participant profile. Specifically, moderated effects indicated that RM system use was associated with increased listening effort for youth who had (a) average to below-average nonverbal cognitive ability, (b) below-average language ability, and (c) reduced audiovisual integration. RM system use was also associated with decreased listening effort for youth with very high nonverbal cognitive ability. CONCLUSIONS: This study extends prior work by showing that RM systems have the potential to boost listening-in-noise accuracy for youth with autism. However, this boost in accuracy was coupled with increased listening effort, as indexed by longer reaction times while using an RM system, for some youth with autism, perhaps suggesting greater engagement in the listening-in-noise tasks when using the RM system for youth who had lower cognitive abilities, were less linguistically able, and/or have difficulty integrating seen and heard speech. These findings have important implications for clinical practice, suggesting RM system use in classrooms could potentially improve listening-in-noise performance for some youth with autism.
35030249|a|IMPORTANCE: Rates of occupational therapy service utilization among people with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) or intellectual disability (ID) have not been explored in population-based samples. OBJECTIVE: To describe occupational therapy services delivered to Medicaid-eligible persons younger than age 65 yr identified as having ASD, ID, or both and to evaluate demographic factors associated with occupational therapy service utilization in this population. DESIGN: Retrospective, case-control, cohort study using claims records from Medicaid Analytic eXtract files (2009-2012). SETTING: Data from all 50 states and Washington, DC. PARTICIPANTS: Beneficiaries identified as having ASD only, ASD+ID, or ID only who were younger than age 18 yr (N = 664,214) and ages 18-64 yr (N = 702,338). Outcomes and Measures: We analyzed Current Procedural Terminology  and Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System procedure codes, Medicaid Statistical Information System type of service codes, and Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services provider specialty codes. RESULTS: Only 3.7% to 6.3% of eligible adult beneficiaries received occupational therapy; in contrast, 20.5% to 24.2% of children received occupational therapy. Significant predictors of service use varied by group; however, differences by race-ethnicity, eligibility on the basis of poverty, and geographic location were observed. Among children, the most frequent billing code was for "therapeutic activities" (43%-60%); among adults, it was "community/work reintegration training" (29%-39%). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Billed procedure code patterns do not consistently reflect the unique occupational focus that occupational therapy providers deliver to people with developmental disabilities. Disparities in occupational therapy receipt warrant further attention to understand the social and structural factors affecting service delivery. What This Article Adds: Occupational therapy services paid for by Medicaid are used more frequently by children with ASD and ID than by adults with these diagnoses. Greater understanding of the intersectional factors that drive service delivery and disparities is needed.
35029811|a|While behavioral interventions remain the mainstay of treatment of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), several potential targeted treatments addressing the underlying neurophysiology of ASD have emerged in the last few years. These are promising for the potential to, in future, become part of the mainstay treatment in addressing the core symptoms of ASD. Although it is likely that the development of future targeted treatments will be influenced by the underlying heterogeneity in etiology, associated genetic mechanisms influencing ASD are likely to be the first targets of treatments and even gene therapy in the future for ASD. In this article, we provide a review of current psychopharmacological treatment in ASD including those used to address common comorbidities of the condition and upcoming new targeted approaches in autism management. Medications including metformin, arbaclofen, cannabidiol, oxytocin, bumetanide, lovastatin, trofinetide, and dietary supplements including sulforophane and N-acetylcysteine are discussed. Commonly used medications to address the comorbidities associated with ASD including atypical antipsychotics, serotoninergic agents, alpha-2 agonists, and stimulant medications are also reviewed. Targeted treatments in Fragile X syndrome (FXS), the most common genetic disorder leading to ASD, provide a model for new treatments that may be helpful for other forms of ASD.
35029807|a|There is a dearth of validated red flags measures for early identification of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) among toddlers. Hence, a new screening measure was developed. Item generation was done through literature search. Content validity (CVI) assessment was done. Criterion validity was done using Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 5 (DSM-5) as reference standard, data were collected from the case records of children with ASD diagnosis at 2 y, and evaluated for developmental milestones between 12 and 18 mo in a tertiary care setting. Item reduction of the measure from 18 to 9 was done. The area under the curve in the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve for new measure was 0.81 (95% CI = 0.73, 0.87); z = 7.874; p < 0.001 against DSM-5 score of >= 2 in the new measure; achieved sensitivity of 93.42% (95% CI = 85.3, 97.8) and specificity of 60% (95% CI = 45.9, 73.0). Thus, new validated red flag sign card (Concern-9) can be used effectively for early screening and identification of ASD among children aged 12-18 mo.
35028884|a|In relation to dietary intervention in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), certain food constituents especially gluten and casein are recognized to be challenging and should be restricted. In this study, levels of glutathione S-transferase, glutathione, lipid peroxides, serotonin (5-HT), interleukin-6 (IL-6), glutamate, and gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) were measured in the brain homogenates of ASD rodent model. Rats were treated either with single dose clindamycin (30 mg/kg) or with propionic acid (PPA) (250 mg/kg) for 3 days and then fed a standard diet, casein-rich diet (CRD), or gluten-rich diet (GRD). The obtained data demonstrates that clindamycin and PPA induced oxidative stress, which was slightly affected by CRD. A marked increase in the proinflammatory cytokine (IL-6) concentration found in clindamycin- and PPA-treated groups was lower in CRD fed rats. Both CRDs and GRDs produced similar trends in glutamate levels. 5-HT levels were higher in the clindamycin- and PPA-treated groups and increased with a GRD but were less affected by a CRD. CRD could be less deleterious compared to GRD. Although the underlying cause of gastrointestinal symptoms in patients with ASD is not exactly known, the most widely accepted one is the opioid theory which is related to GRD and CRD.
35028809|a|Emotional and behavioral problems (EBPs) frequently occur in young autistic children. Discrepancies between parents and other informants are common but can lead to uncertainty in formulation, diagnosis and care planning. This study aimed to explore child and informant characteristics are associated with reported child EBPs across settings. Participants were 83 4-8-year-old autistic children and their parents and teachers in the Autism Spectrum Treatment and Resilience (ASTAR) study. Questionnaires of child EBPs were completed by parents and teachers, and self-reported parenting stress and wellbeing measures were obtained. An observation of parent-child/researcher-child interaction was also completed. Parents reported more EBPs than teachers and parent-teacher agreement was low, particularly for emotional problems. Greater parenting stress and being verbal was associated with more parent- but not teacher-reported EBPs. More observed behaviors that challenge were displayed by minimally verbal children. More parenting stress could be associated with the presence of more EBPs in the home; alternatively, parenting stress may confound reports. It is essential for assessments of EBPs in autistic children to take a multi-informant approach. Better understanding of the associations between informant characteristics and informant discrepancies of EBPs is needed.
35028808|a|The Theory of Mind Inventory-2 (ToMI-2) is a promising measure for assessing theory of mind (ToM) and social-related functions. However, limited evidence on its factorial validity hampers score interpretation. To examine the factorial validity, confirmatory factor analysis for two currently-available structures was performed in 420 typically developing children aged three to seven years. One, the development-based structure, contains three stages of ToM development: the early, basic, and advanced ToM stages. The other, the social-related structure, comprises three social-related ToM functions: emotion recognition, mental state term comprehension, and pragmatics. The results showed that these structures and the unidimensionality of each domain were not supported even after modifications. Thus, further revisions and examinations of the underlying structures of the ToMI-2 are needed.
35028807|a|The present study examined the role of IQ and the Theory of Mind understanding in children with an autism spectrum disorder and down syndrome. Sixty-six Swedish children with ASD (n = 26), DS (n = 18), and typically developed group (n = 22) ranged between 6 and 12 years old were compared on ToM tasks consisted of standard ToM and IQ tasks. SPSS 25 program was used to analyze data. The results indicated that individuals with ASD reach a better understanding of first-order ToM tasks than children with DS. This picture was the same in the TD group to show better ability than children with ASD and DS on first-order tasks, except one task which was not found significant differences. To employ second-order TD performed better than clinical groups, while, there was no significant difference between ASD and DS. The scores for the third-order task in children with ASD were significantly better than children with DS.
35028569|a|Prevalence of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has been increasing in the United States in the past decades. The exact mechanisms remain enigmatic, and diagnosis of the disease still relies primarily on assessment of behavior. We first used a case-control design (75 idiopathic cases and 29 controls, enrolled at Boston Children's Hospital from 2007-2012) to identify plasma biomarkers of ASD through a metabolome-wide association study approach. Then we leveraged a family-based design (31 families) to investigate the influence of shared genetic and environmental components on the autism-associated features. Using untargeted high-resolution mass spectrometry metabolomics platforms, we detected 19 184 features. Of these, 191 were associated with ASD (false discovery rate < 0.05). We putatively annotated 30 features that had an odds ratio (OR) between <0.01 and 5.84. An identified endogenous metabolite, O-phosphotyrosine, was associated with an extremely low autism odds (OR 0.17; 95% confidence interval 0.06-0.39). We also found that glutathione metabolism was associated with ASD (P = 0.048). Correlations of the significant features between proband and parents were low (median = 0.09). Of the 30 annotated features, the median correlations within families (proband-parents) were -0.15 and 0.24 for the endogenous and exogenous metabolites, respectively. We hypothesize that, without feature identification, family-based correlation analysis of autism-associated features can be an alternative way to assist the prioritization of potentially diagnostic features. A panel of ASD diagnostic metabolic markers with high specificity could be derived upon further studies.
35028535|a|Oxytocin (OXT) and arginine vasopressin (AVP), two neuropeptides involved in socio-emotional behaviors have been anatomically defined in the adult brain. Yet their spatial organization during postnatal development is not clearly defined. We built a developmental atlas using 3D imaging of cleared immunolabeled tissue over four early postnatal (P) stages, from birth (P0, P3, P7, P14) to young adulthood (>=P56). Our atlas-based mapping revealed that the number of OXT neurons doubles according to unique temporal dynamics in selective hypothalamic regions, namely, the periventricular and paraventricular nuclei, and in a novel location we named the antero-lateral preoptic. In the paraventricular nucleus, single-cell densities and fluorescence analysis demonstrated selective expansion of OXT cells in the antero-ventral division, whereas the postero-dorsal division contained cells present at birth. No changes were observed for AVP neurons. Our findings show the coexisting of innate and plastic OXT/AVP brain circuits probably triggered by environmental adaptation of the social brain.
35027884|a|Abnormalities in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), as well as the underlying white matter (WM) tracts, lie at the intersection of many neurodevelopmental disorders. The influence of microorganisms on brain development has recently been brought into the clinical and research spotlight as alterations in commensal microbiota are implicated in such disorders, including autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia, depression, and anxiety via the gut-brain axis. In addition, gut dysbiosis is common in preterm birth patients who often display diffuse WM injury and delayed WM maturation in critical tracts including those within the PFC and corpus callosum. Microbial colonization of the gut aligns with ongoing postnatal processes of oligodendrogenesis and the peak of brain myelination in humans; however, the influence of microbiota on gyral WM development remains elusive. Here, we develop and validate a neonatal germ-free swine model to address these issues, as piglets share key similarities in WM volume, developmental trajectories, and distribution to humans. We find significant region-specific reductions, and sexually dimorphic trends, in WM volume, oligodendrogenesis, and mature oligodendrocyte numbers in germ-free piglets during a key postnatal epoch of myelination. Our findings indicate that microbiota plays a critical role in promoting WM development during early life when the brain is vulnerable to environmental insults that can result in an array of disabilities manifesting later in life.
35027651|a|Retinoic acid-related orphan receptor alpha (RORA) suppression is associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) development, although the mechanism remains unclear. In this study, we aim to investigate the potential effect and mechanisms of RORA suppression on autism-like behavior (ALB) through maternal diabetes-mediated mouse model. Our in vitro study in human neural progenitor cells shows that transient hyperglycemia induces persistent RORA suppression through oxidative stress-mediated epigenetic modifications and subsequent dissociation of octamer-binding transcription factor 3/4 from the RORA promoter, subsequently suppressing the expression of aromatase and superoxide dismutase 2. The in vivo mouse study shows that prenatal RORA deficiency in neuron-specific RORA null mice mimics maternal diabetes-mediated ALB; postnatal RORA expression in the amygdala ameliorates, while postnatal RORA knockdown mimics, maternal diabetes-mediated ALB in offspring. In addition, RORA mRNA levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells decrease to 34.2% in ASD patients (n = 121) compared to the typically developing group (n = 118), and the related Receiver Operating Characteristic curve shows good sensitivity and specificity with a calculated 84.1% of Area Under the Curve for ASD diagnosis. We conclude that maternal diabetes contributes to ALB in offspring through suppression of RORA and aromatase, RORA expression in PBMC could be a potential marker for ASD screening.
35026469|a|Variants in CSDE1, a gene encoding a constrained RNA-binding protein, have recently been associated with a spectrum of neurodevelopmental conditions encompassing autism, seizures and ocular abnormalities. According to previously reported individuals, pathogenic variants in CSDE1 are typically associated with developmental delay and intellectual disability. Here, we report one individual with normal neurodevelopment and adult-onset neuropsychiatric features (i.e., acute psychosis) due to the novel de novo truncating variant c.2272C  >  T, p.(Gln758*) in CSDE1 (NM_001242891.1). Neuropsychological assessment confirmed deficits regarding verbal fluency, semantic memory, executive function and processing speed. Overall, our findings expand the phenotypic spectrum of CSDE1-related disorder towards the mild end.
35026379|a|BACKGROUND: The temporal association between type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) and major psychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia, major affective disorder, autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), remains elusive. METHODS: The specialized databases of catastrophic diseases and mental disorders and the longitudinal health insurance database of Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database were used in current study. A total of 6,226 patients with T1DM and 62,260 age- and sex-matched controls were recruited between 2001 and 2010 and were followed until the end of 2011 for the identification of diagnoses of schizophrenia (International Classification of Clinical Diseases, Ninth Edition, Clinical Modification [ICD-9-CM] code: 295), bipolar disorder (ICD-9-CM codes: 296 except 296.2x, 296.3x, 296.9x, and 296.82), major depressive disorder (ICD-9-CM codes: 296.2x and 296.3x), ASD (ICD-9-CM code: 299), and ADHD (ICD-9-CM code: 314). RESULTS: Cox regression analysis revealed increased hazard ratios of schizophrenia (12.28), bipolar disorder (13.80), major depressive disorder (10.41), ASD (14.52), and ADHD (8.19) in patients with T1DM compared with controls. DISCUSSION: Our findings indicate the importance of clinicians closely monitoring the mental health condition of children, adolescents, and adults with T1DM. Additional studies should be conducted to elucidate the definite pathomechanisms of comorbidities between T1DM and major psychiatric disorders.
35026139|a|BACKGROUND: The mental disorders included in the Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study (GBD) 2019 were depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorders, conduct disorder, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, eating disorders, idiopathic developmental intellectual disability, and a residual category of other mental disorders. We aimed to measure the global, regional, and national prevalence, disability-adjusted life-years (DALYS), years lived with disability (YLDs), and years of life lost (YLLs) for mental disorders from 1990 to 2019. METHODS: In this study, we assessed prevalence and burden estimates from GBD 2019 for 12 mental disorders, males and females, 23 age groups, 204 countries and territories, between 1990 and 2019. DALYs were estimated as the sum of YLDs and YLLs to premature mortality. We systematically reviewed PsycINFO, Embase, PubMed, and the Global Health Data Exchange to obtain data on prevalence, incidence, remission, duration, severity, and excess mortality for each mental disorder. These data informed a Bayesian meta-regression analysis to estimate prevalence by disorder, age, sex, year, and location. Prevalence was multiplied by corresponding disability weights to estimate YLDs. Cause-specific deaths were compiled from mortality surveillance databases. The Cause of Death Ensemble modelling strategy was used to estimate death rate by age, sex, year, and location. The death rates were multiplied by the years of life expected to be remaining at death based on a normative life expectancy to estimate YLLs. Deaths and YLLs could be calculated only for anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, since these were the only mental disorders identified as underlying causes of death in GBD 2019. FINDINGS: Between 1990 and 2019, the global number of DALYs due to mental disorders increased from 80 8 million (95% uncertainty interval [UI] 59 5-105 9) to 125 3 million (93 0-163 2), and the proportion of global DALYs attributed to mental disorders increased from 3 1% (95% UI 2 4-3 9) to 4 9% (3 9-6 1). Age-standardised DALY rates remained largely consistent between 1990 (1581 2 DALYs [1170 9-2061 4] per 100 000 people) and 2019 (1566 2 DALYs [1160 1-2042 8] per 100 000 people). YLDs contributed to most of the mental disorder burden, with 125 3 million YLDs (95% UI 93 0-163 2; 14 6% [12 2-16 8] of global YLDs) in 2019 attributable to mental disorders. Eating disorders accounted for 17 361 5 YLLs (95% UI 15 518 5-21 459 8). Globally, the age-standardised DALY rate for mental disorders was 1426 5 (95% UI 1056 4-1869 5) per 100 000 population among males and 1703 3 (1261 5-2237 8) per 100 000 population among females. Age-standardised DALY rates were highest in Australasia, Tropical Latin America, and high-income North America. INTERPRETATION: GBD 2019 showed that mental disorders remained among the top ten leading causes of burden worldwide, with no evidence of global reduction in the burden since 1990. The estimated YLLs for mental disorders were extremely low and do not reflect premature mortality in individuals with mental disorders. Research to establish causal pathways between mental disorders and other fatal health outcomes is recommended so that this may be addressed within the GBD study. To reduce the burden of mental disorders, coordinated delivery of effective prevention and treatment programmes by governments and the global health community is imperative. FUNDING: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Australian National Health and Medical Research Council, Queensland Department of Health, Australia.
35026135|a|Numerous studies have shown the possible contributions of the gut microbiome to the pathogenesis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, recently in Cell, Yap et al. found that autism-related dietary preferences may mediate the ASD-microbiome associations, while the direct associations between ASD and gut microbiota are negligible.
35024817|a|Opioid drugs are analgesics increasingly being prescribed to control pain associated with a wide range of causes. Usage of pregnant women has dramatically increased in the past decades. Neonates born to these women are at risk for neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS, also referred termed neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome, NOWS). Negative birth outcomes linked with maternal opioid use disorder include compromised fetal growth, premature birth, reduced birthweight, and congenital defects. Such infants require lengthier hospital stays necessitating rising health care costs, and they are at greater risk for neurobehavioral and other diseases. Thus, it is essential to understand the genesis of such disorders. As the primary communication organ between mother and conceptus, the placenta itself is susceptible to opioid effects but may be key to understanding how these drugs affect long-term offspring health and how poor health outcomes may be ameliorated in utero. In this review, we will consider the evidence that placental responses are regulated through an endogenous opioid system. However, maternal consumption of opioid drugs can also bind and act through opioid receptors express by trophoblast (TB) cells of the placenta. Thus, we will also discuss the current human and rodent studies that have examined the effects of opioids on the placenta. These drugs might affect placental hormones associated with maternal recognition of pregnancy, including placental lactogens and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in rodents and humans, respectively. A further understanding of how such drugs affect the placenta may open up new avenues for early diagnosis and remediation approaches.
35024693|a|Androgens are synthesized in the brain, gonads, and adrenal glands, in both sexes, exerting physiologically important effects on the structure and function of the central nervous system. These effects may contribute to the incidence and progression of neurological disorders such as autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, and Alzheimer's disease, which occur at different rates in males and females. This review briefly summarizes the current state of knowledge with respect to the neuroplastic effects of androgens, with particular emphasis on the hippocampus, which has been the focus of much of the research in this field.
35024691|a|The aromatase cytochrome P450 (P450arom) enzyme, or estrogen synthase, which is coded by the CYP19A1 gene, is widely expressed in a subpopulation of excitatory and inhibitory neurons, astrocytes, and other cell types in the human brain. Experimental studies in laboratory animals indicate a prominent role of brain aromatization of androgens to estrogens in regulating different brain functions. However, the consequences of aromatase expression in the human brain remain poorly understood. Here, we summarize the current knowledge about aromatase expression in the human brain, abundant in the thalamus, amygdala, hypothalamus, cortex, and hippocampus and discuss its role in the regulation of sensory integration, body homeostasis, social behavior, cognition, language, and integrative functions. Since brain aromatase is affected by neurodegenerative conditions and may participate in sex-specific manifestations of autism spectrum disorders, major depressive disorder, multiple sclerosis, stroke, and Alzheimer's disease, we discuss future avenues for research and potential clinical and therapeutic implications of the expression of aromatase in the human brain.
35024533|a|Temporal networks have become increasingly pervasive in many real-world applications, including the functional connectivity analysis of spatially separated regions of the brain. A major challenge in analysis of such networks is the identification of noise confounds, which introduce temporal ties that are nonessential, or links that are formed by chance due to local properties of the nodes. Several approaches have been suggested in the past for static networks or temporal networks with binary weights for extracting significant ties whose likelihood cannot be reduced to the local properties of the nodes. In this work, we propose a data-driven procedure to reveal the irreducible ties in dynamic functional connectivity of resting-state fMRI data with continuous weights. This framework includes a null model that estimates the latent characteristics of the distributions of temporal links through optimization, followed by a statistical test to filter the links whose formation can be reduced to the activities and local properties of their interacting nodes. We demonstrate the benefits of this approach by applying it to a resting-state fMRI dataset, and provide further discussion on various aspects and advantages of it.
35023977|a|Purpose: Most previous genetic studies of sleep behaviors were conducted individually, without comprehensive consideration of the complexity of various sleep behaviors. Our aim is to identify the genetic architecture and potential biomarker of the sleep health score, which more powerfully represents overall sleep traits. Patients and Methods: We conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of sleep health score (overall assessment of sleep duration, snoring, insomnia, chronotype, and daytime dozing) using 336,463 participants from the UK Biobank. Proteome-wide association study (PWAS) and transcriptome-wide association study (TWAS) were then performed to identify candidate genes at the protein and mRNA level, respectively. We finally used linkage disequilibrium score regression (LDSC) to estimate the genetic correlations between sleep health score and other functionally relevance traits. Results: GWAS identified multiple variants near known candidate genes associated with sleep health score, such as MEIS1, FBXL13, MED20 and SMAD5. HDHD2 (PPWAS = 0.0146) and GFAP (PPWAS = 0.0236) were identified associated with sleep health score by PWAS. TWAS identified ORC4 (PTWAS = 0.0212) and ZNF732 (PTWAS = 0.0349) considering mRNA expression level. LDSC found significant genetic correlations of sleep health score with 3 sleep behaviors (including insomnia, snoring, dozing), 4 psychiatry disorders (major depressive disorder, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorder), and 9 plasma protein (such as Stabilin-1, Stromelysin-2, Cytochrome c) (all LDSC PLDSC < 0.05). Conclusion: Our results advance the comprehensive understanding of the aetiology and genetic architecture of the sleep health score, refine the understanding of the relationship of sleep health score with other traits and diseases, and may serve as potential targets for future mechanistic studies of sleep phenotype.
35023286|a|Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is especially severe in aged patients, defined as 65 years or older, for reasons that are currently unknown. To investigate the underlying basis for this vulnerability, we performed multimodal data analyses on immunity, inflammation, and COVID-19 incidence and severity as a function of age. Our analysis leveraged age-specific COVID-19 mortality and laboratory testing from a large COVID-19 registry, along with epidemiological data of ~3.4 million individuals, large-scale deep immune cell profiling data, and single-cell RNA-sequencing data from aged COVID-19 patients across diverse populations. We found that decreased lymphocyte count and elevated inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein, D-dimer, and neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio) are significantly associated with age-specific COVID-19 severities. We identified the reduced abundance of naive CD8 T cells with decreased expression of antiviral defense genes (i.e., IFITM3 and TRIM22) in aged severe COVID-19 patients. Older individuals with severe COVID-19 displayed type I and II interferon deficiencies, which is correlated with SARS-CoV-2 viral load. Elevated expression of SARS-CoV-2 entry factors and reduced expression of antiviral defense genes (LY6E and IFNAR1) in the secretory cells are associated with critical COVID-19 in aged individuals. Mechanistically, we identified strong TGF-beta-mediated immune-epithelial cell interactions (i.e., secretory-non-resident macrophages) in aged individuals with critical COVID-19. Taken together, our findings point to immuno-inflammatory factors that could be targeted therapeutically to reduce morbidity and mortality in aged COVID-19 patients.
35023172|a|Epigenetic modifications by toxic heavy metals are one of the intensively investigated fields of modern genomic research. Among a diverse group of heavy metals, lead (Pb) is an extensively distributed toxicant causing an immense number of abnormalities in the developing fetus via a wide variety of epigenetic changes. As a divalent cation, Pb can readily cross the placental membrane and the fetal blood brain barrier leading to far-reaching alterations in DNA methylation patterns, histone protein modifications and micro-RNA expression. Over recent years, several human cohorts and animal model studies have documented hyper- and hypo-methylation of developmental genes along with altered DNA methyl-transferase expression by in utero Pb exposure in a dose-, duration- and sex-dependent manner. Modifications in the expression of specific histone acetyltransferase enzymes along with histone acetylation and methylation levels have been reported in rodent and murine models. Apart from these, down-regulation and up-regulation of certain microRNAs crucial for fetal development have been shown to be associated with in utero Pb exposure in human placenta samples. All these modifications in the developing fetus during the prenatal and perinatal stages reportedly caused severe abnormalities in early or adult age, such as - impaired growth, obesity, autism, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, risks of cancer development and Alzheimer's disease. In this review, currently available information on Pb-mediated alterations in the fetal epigenome is summarized. Further research on Pb-induced epigenome modification will help to understand the mechanisms in detail and will enable us to formulate safety guidelines for pregnant women and developing children.
35023065|a|Neuroimaging studies have demonstrated aberrant structure and function of the "cognitive-affective cerebellum" in major depressive disorder (MDD), although the specific role of the cerebello-cerebral circuitry in this population remains largely uninvestigated. The objective of this study was to delineate the role of cerebellar functional networks in depression. A total of 308 unmedicated participants completed resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging scans, of which 247 (148 MDD; 99 healthy controls, HC) were suitable for this study. Seed-based resting-state functional connectivity (RsFc) analysis was performed using three cerebellar regions of interest (ROIs): ROI1 corresponded to default mode network (DMN)/inattentive processing; ROI2 corresponded to attentional networks, including frontoparietal, dorsal attention, and ventral attention; ROI3 corresponded to motor processing. These ROIs were delineated based on prior functional gradient analyses of the cerebellum. A general linear model was used to perform within-group and between-group comparisons. In comparison to HC, participants with MDD displayed increased RsFc within the cerebello-cerebral DMN (ROI1) and significantly elevated RsFc between the cerebellar ROI1 and bilateral angular gyrus at a voxel threshold (p < 0.001, two-tailed) and at a cluster level (p < 0.05, FDR-corrected). Group differences were non-significant for ROI2 and ROI3. These results contribute to the development of a systems neuroscience approach to the diagnosis and treatment of MDD. Specifically, our findings confirm previously reported associations between MDD, DMN, and cerebellum, and highlight the promising role of these functional and anatomical locations for the development of novel imaging-based biomarkers and targets for neuromodulation therapies. ClinicalTrials.gov TRN: NCT01655706; Date of Registration: August 2nd, 2012.
35023029|a|S tem cell factor (SCF) and its receptor (c-kit) signaling play important role in normal brain physiology including neurogenesis, synapse formation and spatial learning function of the hippocampal region of the brain. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is believed to result from abnormal development of neuronal networks and synaptic function. The aim of this study was to evaluate the SCF and its soluble receptor (s-ckit) serum concentrations in ASD. We also studied the serum SCF and s-ckit concentration with the severity of ASD (Levels 1-3; Mild, Moderate and severe, respectively). Ninety five patients with ASD (Mild; n=33, Moderate; n=32 and severe; n=30) and 82 normal controls age matched were included in this study. The serum concentration of SCF and s-ckit were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The SCF serum concentration in control subjects was 3.45+-1.06 ng/ml and in ASD was 3.41+-0.92 ng/ml (P=0.88). The serum levels of s-ckit in control and ASD groups were 56.82+-13.22 ng/ml and 67.11+-12.00, respectively (P=001). We have also studied serum SCF and s-ckit concentrations with the severity of ASD. The serum concentration of SCF in mild, moderate and severe ASD groups was 3.45+-0.93, 3.4+-0.87 and 3.43+-0.98 ng/ml, respectively (P>0.05) and for s-ckit was 48.77+-9.28, 61.66+-12.18 and 93.11+-14.81ng/ml, respectively (P<0.05). The result of this study suggests that serum s-cKit concentrations may provide a reliable and practical indicator of ASD and positively correlated with disease severity. It is also concluded that s-cKit might be involved in the pathophysiology of ASD.
35022945|a|A survey asked autistic and non-autistic people about the driving difficulties they experience and their autistic traits. Principle components analysis was used to identify how reported difficulties clustered together in each group, and regression was used to determine which subscales of the Autism Spectrum Quotient predict these factors. For autistic drivers three factors of driving difficulty emerged: a Driving Executive factor, predicted by Attention Switching; a Driving Understanding factor, predicted by Communication; and a Driving Social Interaction factor, predicted by Attention Switching. For non-autistic drivers only one Driving General factor emerged, predicted by Communication. This suggests autistic people may experience at least three distinct domains of difficulty when driving which may relate to their particular profile of autistic features.
35022944|a|There is a need for more knowledge of valid and standardized measures of mental health problems among children and adolescents with intellectual disability (ID). In this study, we systematically reviewed and evaluated the psychometric properties of instruments used to assess general mental health problems in this population. Following PRISMA guidelines, we reviewed empirical research published from 1980 through February 2020 with an updated search in March 2021 in Medline, Embase, PsycINFO, Health and Psychological Instruments, CINAHL, ERIC, and Web of Science databases. Forty-nine empirical articles were included in this review. Overall, the review indicated consistently better documentation of the reliability and validity of instruments designed for the ID population compared to instruments developed for the general child population.
35022943|a|A randomized feasibility trial of a parent coaching (PC) intervention was conducted across 16 community agencies in a Canadian province. Parents of toddlers with suspected autism were assigned to either a PC group (n = 24) or an enhanced community treatment (ECT) group (n = 25). PC participants received 24 weeks of coaching support from community service providers trained in the project. Children in both groups also received available community services and supplementary materials. PC children made significantly greater gains in word understanding and PC parents had significantly higher quality of life, satisfaction, and self-efficacy scores. Results are discussed in terms of the challenges of conducting feasibility studies in community settings and the lessons learned in the project.
35022792|a|STUDY OBJECTIVES: Converging evidence from neuroimaging, sleep, and genetic studies suggests that dysregulation of thalamocortical interactions mediated by the thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) contribute to autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Sleep spindles assay TRN function, and their coordination with cortical slow oscillations (SOs) indexes thalamocortical communication. These oscillations mediate memory consolidation during sleep. In the present study, we comprehensively characterized spindles and their coordination with SOs in relation to memory and age in children with ASD. METHODS: Nineteen children and adolescents with ASD, without intellectual disability, and 18 typically developing (TD) peers, aged 9-17, completed a home polysomnography study with testing on a spatial memory task before and after sleep. Spindles, SOs, and their coordination were characterized during stages 2 (N2) and 3 (N3) non-rapid eye movement sleep. RESULTS: ASD participants showed disrupted SO-spindle coordination during N2 sleep. Spindles peaked later in SO upstates and their timing was less consistent. They also showed a spindle density (#/min) deficit during N3 sleep. Both groups showed significant sleep-dependent memory consolidation, but its relations with spindle density differed. While TD participants showed the expected positive correlations, ASD participants showed the opposite. CONCLUSIONS: The disrupted SO-spindle coordination and spindle deficit provide further evidence of abnormal thalamocortical interactions and TRN dysfunction in ASD. The inverse relations of spindle density with memory suggest a different function for spindles in ASD than TD. We propose that abnormal sleep oscillations reflect genetically mediated disruptions of TRN-dependent thalamocortical circuit development that contribute to the manifestations of ASD and are potentially treatable.
35022531|a|Mutations in the SHANK3 gene have been recognized as a genetic risk factor for Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), a neurodevelopmental disease characterized by social deficits and repetitive behaviors. While heterozygous SHANK3 mutations are usually the types of mutations associated with idiopathic autism in patients, heterozygous deletion of Shank3 gene in mice does not commonly induce ASD-related behavioral deficit. Here, we used in-vivo and ex-vivo approaches to demonstrate that region-specific neonatal downregulation of Shank3 in the Nucleus Accumbens promotes D1R-medium spiny neurons (D1R-MSNs) hyperexcitability and upregulates Transient Receptor Potential Vanilloid 4 (Trpv4) to impair social behavior. Interestingly, genetically vulnerable Shank3+/- mice, when challenged with Lipopolysaccharide to induce an acute inflammatory response, showed similar circuit and behavioral alterations that were rescued by acute Trpv4 inhibition. Altogether our data demonstrate shared molecular and circuit mechanisms between ASD-relevant genetic alterations and environmental insults, which ultimately lead to sociability dysfunctions.
35022430|a|Copy number variants (CNVs) are recognized as a crucial genetic cause of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA), the first-tier diagnostic test for individuals with NDDs, has been utilized to detect CNVs in clinical practice, but most reports are still from populations of European ancestry. To contribute more worldwide clinical genomics data, we investigated the genetic etiology of 410 Han Chinese patients with NDDs (151 with autism and 259 with unexplained intellectual disability (ID) and developmental delay (DD)) using CMA (Affymetrix) after G-banding karyotyping. Among all the NDD patients, 109 (26.6%) carried clinically relevant CNVs or uniparental disomies (UPDs), and 8 (2.0%) had aneuploidies (6 with trisomy 21 syndrome, 1 with 47,XXY, 1 with 47,XYY). In total, we found 129 clinically relevant CNVs and UPDs, including 32 CNVs in 30 ASD patients, and 92 CNVs and 5 UPDs in 79 ID/DD cases. When excluding the eight patients with aneuploidies, the diagnostic yield of pathogenic and likely pathogenic CNVs and UPDs was 20.9% for all NDDs (84/402), 3.3% in ASD (5/151), and 31.5% in ID/DD (79/251). When aneuploidies were included, the diagnostic yield increased to 22.4% for all NDDs (92/410), and 33.6% for ID/DD (87/259). We identified a de novo CNV in 14.9% (60/402) of subjects with NDDs. Interestingly, a higher diagnostic yield was observed in females (31.3%, 40/128) compared to males (16.1%, 44/274) for all NDDs (P = 4.8 x 10-4), suggesting that a female protective mechanism exists for deleterious CNVs and UPDs.
35022383|a|Higher prevalence of autism in offspring born to mothers with rheumatoid arthritis has been reported in observational studies. We investigated (a) the associations between maternal and offspring's own genetic liability for rheumatoid arthritis and autism-related outcomes in the offspring using polygenic risk scores (PRS) and (b) whether the effects were causal using Mendelian randomization (MR). Using the latest genome-wide association (GWAS) summary data on rheumatoid arthritis and individual-level data from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children, United Kingdom, we constructed PRSs for maternal and offspring genetic liability for rheumatoid arthritis (single-nucleotide polymorphism [SNP] p-value threshold 0.05). We investigated associations with autism, and autistic traits: social and communication difficulties, coherence, repetitive behaviours and sociability. We used modified Poisson regression with robust standard errors. In two-sample MR analyses, we used 40 genome-wide significant SNPs for rheumatoid arthritis and investigated the causal effects on risk for autism, in 18,381 cases and 27,969 controls of the Psychiatric Genetics Consortium and iPSYCH. Sample size ranged from 4992 to 7849 in PRS analyses. We found little evidence of associations between rheumatoid arthritis PRSs and autism-related phenotypes in the offspring (maternal PRS on autism: RR 0.89, 95%CI 0.73-1.07, p = 0.21; offspring's own PRS on autism: RR 1.11, 95%CI 0.88-1.39, p = 0.39). MR results provided little evidence for a causal effect (IVW OR 1.01, 95%CI 0.98-1.04, p = 0.56). There was little evidence for associations between genetic liability for rheumatoid arthritis on autism-related outcomes in offspring. Lifetime risk for rheumatoid arthritis has no causal effects on autism.
35021990|a|BACKGROUND: Differences in face processing in individuals with ASD is hypothesized to impact the development of social communication skills. This study aimed to characterize the neural correlates of face processing in 12-month-old infants at familial risk of developing ASD by (1) comparing face-sensitive event-related potentials (ERP) (Nc, N290, P400) between high-familial-risk infants who develop ASD (HR-ASD), high-familial-risk infants without ASD (HR-NoASD), and low-familial-risk infants (LR), and (2) evaluating how face-sensitive ERP components are associated with development of social communication skills. METHODS: 12-month-old infants participated in a study in which they were presented with alternating images of their mother's face and the face of a stranger (LR = 45, HR-NoASD = 41, HR-ASD = 24) as EEG data were collected. Parent-reported and laboratory-observed social communication measures were obtained at 12 and 18 months. Group differences in ERP responses were evaluated using ANOVA, and multiple linear regressions were conducted with maternal education and outcome groups as covariates to assess relationships between ERP and behavioral measures. RESULTS: For each of the ERP components (Nc [negative-central], N290, and P400), the amplitude difference between mother and stranger (Mother-Stranger) trials was not statistically different between the three outcome groups (Nc p = 0.72, N290 p = 0.88, P400 p = 0.91). Marginal effects analyses found that within the LR group, a greater Nc Mother-Stranger response was associated with better expressive language skills on the Mullen Scales of Early Learning, controlling for maternal education and outcome group effects (marginal effects dy/dx = 1.15; p < 0.01). No significant associations were observed between the Nc and language or social measures in HR-NoASD or HR-ASD groups. In contrast, specific to the HR-ASD group, amplitude difference between the Mother versus Stranger P400 response was positively associated with expressive (dy/dx = 2.1, p < 0.001) and receptive language skills at 12 months (dy/dx = 1.68, p < 0.005), and negatively associated with social affect scores on the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (dy/dx = - 1.22, p < 0.001) at 18 months. CONCLUSIONS: In 12-month-old infant siblings with subsequent ASD, increased P400 response to Mother over Stranger faces is positively associated with concurrent language and future social skills.
35021989|a|BACKGROUND: RASopathies are genetic syndromes that result from pathogenic variants in the RAS-MAPK cellular signaling pathway. These syndromes, which include neurofibromatosis type 1, Noonan syndrome, cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome, and Costello syndrome, are associated with a complex array of medical and behavioral health complications. Despite a heightened risk for social challenges and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), few studies have compared different aspects of social behavior across these conditions. It is also unknown whether the underlying neuropsychological characteristics that contribute to social competence and socially empathetic ("prosocial") behaviors differ in children with RASopathies as compared to children with nonsyndromic (i.e., idiopathic) ASD. METHODS: In this cross-sectional, survey-based investigation, caregivers of preschool and school-aged children with RASopathies (n = 202) or with idiopathic ASD (n = 109) provided demographic, medical, and developmental information about their child, including psychiatric comorbidities. For children who were able to communicate verbally, caregivers also completed standardized rating scales to assess social competence and empathetic behavior as well as symptoms of hyperactivity/inattention and emotional problems. RESULTS: As compared to children with idiopathic ASD, children with RASopathies were rated as demonstrating more resilience in the domain of empathy relative to their overall social competence. Similarities and differences emerged in the psychological factors that predicted social behavior in these two groups. Stronger communication skills and fewer hyperactive-impulsive behaviors were associated with increased empathy and social competence for both groups. Greater emotional challenges were associated with lower social competence for children with RASopathies and stronger empathy for children with idiopathic ASD. Among children with RASopathy and a co-occurring ASD diagnosis, socially empathetic behaviors were observed more often as compared to children with idiopathic ASD. CONCLUSIONS: Findings suggest that the development of social behavior among children with RASopathies involves a distinct pattern of strengths and weaknesses as compared to a behaviorally defined disorder (idiopathic ASD). Identification of areas of resilience as well as behavioral and social challenges will support more targeted intervention.
35021914|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Supporting use of evidence-based practice in public service programs for autistic individuals is critical. The California Autism Professional Training and Information Network (CAPTAIN) brings together best practices from intervention and implementation research to support scale up of autism services. The current study was designed to evaluate the impact of CAPTAIN on provider-level outcomes including attitude toward, knowledge, fidelity, and use of autism EBPs and overall classroom quality. Overall, results indicated variability across measures, with some significant differences between CAPTAIN-trained and non-CAPTAIN-trained providers. These preliminary findings show promise for the efficacy of the CAPTAIN model to increase dissemination and implementation of EBP at the classroom level.
35021899|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Restricted interests and repetitive behaviours are central to the diagnosis of autism and can have profound effects on daily activities and quality of life. These challenges are also linked to other co-occurring conditions such as anxiety and sensory sensitivities. Here, we looked at whether early emerging signs of anxiety and sensory problems appear before symptoms of autism by studying infants with a family history of autism, as these infants are more likely to develop autism themselves. Studying infant siblings provides an opportunity for researchers to focus on early developmental markers of autism as these infants can be followed from birth. This study found that early infant signs of anxiety (e.g. fear/shyness) predicted later perceptual sensitivity, and those infants who scored higher on fear/shyness and sensitivity were more likely to experience more persistent repetitive behaviours, but also social and communication difficulties in toddlerhood. Early signs of anxiety and perceptual sensitivity may thus relate to both later social difficulties and repetitive behaviours. These findings support the importance of further research exploring the causal links between these domains in relation to autism, resulting in increased understanding of children who go onto develop autism in the future and guiding early interventions and supports.
35021891|a|This study explores the phenomenon of hikikomori, or extreme social isolation, which for the past 20 years has been associated with a range of negative outcomes, including psychological, financial, and social. As hikikomori is associated with marked social withdrawal in one's home and increased Internet use, it has been suggested that the social and technological changes brought about by COVID-19 restrictions may exacerbate the risk of hikikomori in young adults. This study, therefore, sought to identify the relationship between hikikomori risk and changes in Internet use for young people aged 16-24 years during COVID-19 restrictions. An international sample of 826 participants completed an online survey consisting of questions about demographics, experience of lockdown restrictions in the previous 12 months, changes to Internet use in the previous 12 months and a hikikomori risk scale. Higher hikikomori risk was associated with being male, greater time spent in lockdown, and leaving the house less frequently. An increase in Internet use during lockdown was associated with reduced risk of hikikomori. Findings are discussed in relation to gender differences in the type of Internet use engaged in by males and females. It is concluded that online social interaction may be a means of mitigating hikikomori risk in post-COVID-19 societies.
35021114|a|BACKGROUND: Antibiotics are among the most commonly used drugs in children. In addition to inducing antibiotic resistance, antibiotic exposure has been associated with long-term adverse health outcomes. METHODS: A systematic search using PRISMA Guidelines to identify original studies reporting associations between antibiotic exposure and long-term adverse health outcomes in children. Overall pooled estimates of the odds ratios (ORs) were obtained using fixed or random-effects models. RESULTS: We identified 160 observational studies investigating 21 outcomes in 22,103,129 children. Antibiotic exposure was associated with an increased risk of atopic dermatitis (OR 1.40, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.30-1.52, p<0.01), allergic symptoms (OR 1.93, 95%CI 1.66-2.26, p<0.01), food allergies (OR 1.35, 95%CI 1.20-1.52, p<0.01), allergic rhinoconjunctivitis (OR 1.66, 95%CI 1.51-1.83, p<0.01), wheezing (OR 1.81, 95%CI 1.65-1.97, p<0.01), asthma (OR 1.96, 95%CI 1.76-2.17, p<0.01), increased weight gain or overweight (OR 1.18, 95%CI 1.11-1.26, p<0.01), obesity (OR 1.21, 95%CI 1.05-1.40, p<0.01), juvenile idiopathic arthritis (OR 1.74, 95%CI 1.21-2.52, p<0.01), psoriasis (OR 1.75, 95%CI 1.44-2.11, p<0.01), autism spectrum disorders (OR 1.19, 95%CI 1.04-1.36, p=0.01) and neurodevelopment disorders (OR 1.29, 95%CI 1.09-1.53, p<0.01). Dose-response effects and stronger effects with broad-spectrum antibiotic were often reported. Antibiotic exposure was not associated with an altered risk of allergic sensitisation, infantile colic, abdominal pain, inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, type 1 diabetes, fluorosis, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. CONCLUSION: Although a causal association cannot be determined from these studies, the results support the meticulous application of sound antibiotic stewardship to avoid potential adverse long-term health outcomes.
35021077|a|Gait and posture are often perturbed in many neurological, neuromuscular, and neuropsychiatric conditions. Rodents provide a tractable model for elucidating disease mechanisms and interventions. Here, we develop a neural-network-based assay that adopts the commonly used open field apparatus for mouse gait and posture analysis. We quantitate both with high precision across 62 strains of mice. We characterize four mutants with known gait deficits and demonstrate that multiple autism spectrum disorder (ASD) models show gait and posture deficits, implying this is a general feature of ASD. Mouse gait and posture measures are highly heritable and fall into three distinct classes. We conduct a genome-wide association study to define the genetic architecture of stride-level mouse movement in the open field. We provide a method for gait and posture extraction from the open field and one of the largest laboratory mouse gait and posture data resources for the research community.
35021058|a|Individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders often experience comorbid gastrointestinal distress and dysregulated immune responses, yet the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. In this issue of Immunity, Kim et al. utilize a murine maternal immune activation model of autism and find that inflammation can alter the microbiota of mothers, which postnatally primes offspring CD4+ T cells and increases susceptibility to intestinal inflammation.
35020819|a|Bisphenol A (BPA) is an endocrine-disrupting chemical (EDC) that is used in a wide-variety of plastic and common house-hold items. Therefore, there is potential continual exposure to this compound. BPA exposure has been linked to certain placenta-associated obstetric complications such as preeclampsia, fetal growth restriction, miscarriage, and preterm birth. However, how BPA exposure results in these disorders remains uncertain. Hence, we have herein summarized the reported impact of BPA on the morphology and metabolic state of the placenta and have proposed mechanisms by which BPA affects placentation, potentially leading to obstetric complications. Current findings suggest that BPA induces pathological changes in the placenta and disrupts its metabolic activities. Based on exposure concentrations, BPA can elicit apoptotic or anti-apoptotic signals in the trophoblasts; and can exaggerate trophoblast fusion while inhibiting trophoblast migration and invasion to affect pregnancy. Accordingly, the usage of BPA products by pregnant women should be minimized and less harmful alternative chemicals should be explored and employed where possible.
35020118|a|This paper describes the (Sin Exclusion) Transdisciplinary Autism Assessment and Resources ([S]TAAR) model and presents early metrics tracking efficiency and equity in access to high-quality comprehensive autism evaluations for young children. Retrospective chart reviews over one year (08/2018-08/2019) with n = 173 children were reviewed. Through care coordination with community providers, the model was developed to meet local needs by increasing throughput of children (< 4 years old) evaluated by a transdisciplinary team. Team-based processes included pre-visit triage, synchronous evaluation procedures, case conferencing, huddles, and care coordination. The model led to increased patient throughput, reductions in waitlist and time to diagnosis, and improved provider satisfaction. Improvements in access to care were equitable across patient race, ethnicity, language, and insurance type.
35020117|a|This article reports on a pilot study of a parent-only cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) programme for parents of children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and anxiety difficulties. Twenty-one parents of anxious children with ASD (5-11 of age) completed the From Timid to Tiger intervention. Parent outcome measures were assessed at post-intervention and at 3-month follow-up. Analysis indicated significant reductions in both parent and clinician reports of child anxiety symptoms. Specifically, 38% of children were free of their primary diagnosis at treatment end and this increased to 57% when measured at 3-month follow-up. Positive gains were evidenced regarding parents' ability to manage their child's anxiety without accommodating to it. The results provide preliminary evidence of parent-only CBT programs for children with ASD.
35020116|a|Autistic adults are inadequately supported in the workplace. This study sought a definition of 'reasonable' and explored facilitators and barriers to employers making reasonable adjustments. 98 employers and employees across a UK city completed a survey; 15% identified as being autistic. Qualitative data were analysed using framework analysis. Reasonable adjustments were defined as having a positive impact on autistic employees' wellbeing and work outputs without being detrimental to non-autistic employees or the organisation; they were low cost and easily implemented. Recommendations were for autism awareness training, low-stimulus work spaces, clear instructions and flexible working hours. A definition of reasonable is added to the literature, with suggestions of where to invest support efforts. Recommendations mostly apply to the education sector.
35019241|a|Somatic symptoms are the most common cause of outpatient medical visits in the general population, yet their presence and severity in individuals on the autism spectrum has rarely been studied. We sought to assess the prevalence, impact, and clinical correlates of 14 commonly reported somatic symptoms in a sample of 290 transition-aged autistic young adults (mean [SD] age: 23.10 [2.38] years, range 18-26; 76.7% diagnosed with autism before age 18) recruited from the Simons Foundation SPARK participant pool. A modified version of the Patient Health Questionnaire-15 was used to assess somatic symptom prevalence/impact, along with measures of depression, anxiety, autistic traits, and quality of life. Somatic symptom burden was much higher in autistic young adults than previously reported in the general population. The most commonly reported current symptoms were fatigue (72.8%), sleep problems (69.0%), and menstrual problems (61.4% of females). Moderate or severe symptom levels were reported by 53.9% of females and 18.75% of males in our cohort, with the odds of females endorsing any given symptom being 2-4 times greater than males. Both individual symptoms and total symptom burden were related to higher levels of depression, anxiety, and autistic traits, along with lower quality of life. Despite little research on this topic previously, somatic symptoms are highly prevalent in autistic young adults, particularly women. Future research is needed to investigate links between somatic symptoms, medical and psychiatric morbidity, and health care utilization in the autistic population.
35019088|a|PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to analyze the repercussion of the implementation of PECS on the burden index of mothers of children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). METHODS: This was a longitudinal study (CEP 0403/2017). The sample consisted of 20 mother and child with ASD. The mothers were on average 41 years and 5 months and the children were 7 years and 2 months old. Fifteen children were male and five were female. The brazilian version of the Burden Interview scale was applied to verify the level of caregiver burden. The Autism Behavior Checklist (ABC) was applied to the analysis of non-adaptive behaviors and to analyze the lexical repertoire: Auditory and Expressive Vocabulary Tests. The PECS Implementation Program was composed of 24 sessions of individual speech therapy with the active presence of mothers. At the end all children and mothers were reevaluated with part of the instruments. RESULTS: There was a tendency to reduce maternal overload indexes after the implementation of the PECS. There was a significant decrease in non-adaptive behaviors and an increase in the expressive and auditory vocabulary indexes of the children at the final moment of the study. We did not observe a significant correlation between the degrees of overload with age, schooling and intellectual quotient of children, nor schooling and maternal socioeconomic status. CONCLUSION: It was possible to analyze the repercussion of the implementation of the PECS on the burden of mothers of children with ASD assisted by the Program.
35018983|a|
35018722|a|Autistic youth experience high rates of maltreatment. Little research has considered how distinct abuse dimensions differentially relate to meaningful outcomes, nor taken an intergenerational approach to consider how caregiver trauma and child maltreatment are related. This study sought to identify how parent-reported child abuse subtypes and parent posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) relate to each other and to admission characteristics upon inpatient service entry. Autistic youth (N = 527; 79% White, 21.3% girls, mean age = 12.94 years) participated in the autism inpatient collection. Parents reported on child abuse subtypes (physical, sexual, emotional) and their own PTSD, child behavior and emergency services, and parenting stress. Youth of parents with PTSD were nearly three times more likely to have parent-reported physical and emotional abuse. Autistic girls were more likely to experience parent-reported sexual abuse and a higher number of subtypes. Lower income related to higher rates of parent-reported child emotional abuse and parent PTSD. Emotional abuse associated with child behavior whereas both child physical and emotional abuse related to emergency services. Reported parent PTSD associated with child behavior and parental distress. When considered jointly, parent PTSD and number of parent-reported child abuse subtypes differentially related to child behavior and interacted to predict psychiatric hospitalizations. Intergenerational continuity of trauma is important to consider among autistic youth, and both parent-reported child abuse and parent PTSD relate to admission characteristics. Critical limitations include reliance on binary parent reports of child abuse and parent PTSD and the low representation of youth of minoritized identities. Implications for trauma-informed care are discussed.
35018708|a|WAC-related intellectual disability (ID) is a rare genetic condition characterized by a spectrum of neurodevelopmental disorders of varying severity, including global developmental delay (GDD), ID, and autism spectrum disorder. Here, we describe five affected individuals, age range 9-20 years, and provide proof of pathogenicity of a novel splicing variant. All individuals presented with GDD, some degree of ID, and variable dysmorphism. Except for feeding difficulties, all patients were healthy without major congenital malformations or medical comorbidities. All individuals were heterozygous for de novo, previously unreported, loss of function variants in WAC. Three unrelated patients from different ethnic backgrounds shared the intronic variant c.381+4_381+7delAGTA, which was predicted to alter splicing and was initially classified as a variant of uncertain significance. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis from one patient's cells confirmed aberrant splicing of the WAC transcript resulting in premature termination and a truncated protein p.(Gly92Alafs*2). These functional studies and the identification of several nonrelated individuals provide sufficient evidence to classify this variant as pathogenic. The clinical description of these five individuals and the three novel variants expand the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of this ultrarare disease.
35018608|a|This paper describes a smart tablet-based drawing app to digitally record participants' engagement with the Rey-Osterrieth complex figure (ROCF) task, a well-characterised perceptual memory task that assesses local and global memory. Digitisation of the tasks allows for improved ecological validity, especially in children attracted to tablet devices. Further, digital translation of the tasks affords new measures, including accuracy and computation of the fine motor control kinematics employed to carry out the drawing Here, we report a feasibility study to test the relationship between two neurodevelopmental conditions: autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The smart tablet app was employed with 39 adult participants (18-35) characterised for autistic and ADHD traits, and scored using the ROCF perceptual and organisational scoring systems. Trait scores and conditions were predictor variables in linear regression models. Positive correlations were found between the attention-to-detail, attention-switching and communication subscales of the autistic trait questionnaire and organisational scores on the ROCF task. These findings suggest that autistic traits might be linked to differential performance on the ROCF task. Novelty and future applications of the app are discussed.
35018586|a|Social impairments are common features of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) and autism spectrum disorders (ASD). The Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) allowed access to daily-life information in order to explore the phenomenology of social interactions. 32 individuals with 22q11DS, 26 individuals with ASD and 44 typically developing peers (TD) aged 12-30 were assessed during 6 days 8 times a day using a mobile app. Participants with 22q11DS and ASD did not spend more time alone but showed distinct implication in the social sphere than TD. Distinct profiles emerged between the two conditions regarding the subjective experience of aloneness and the subjective experience of social interactions. This study highlights distinct social functioning profiles in daily-life in 22q11DS and ASD that points towards different therapeutic targets.
35018585|a|An increasing amount of technological solutions aiming to support emotion regulation are being developed for Autistic people. However, there remains a lack of understanding of user needs, and design factors which has led to poor usability and varied success. Furthermore, studies assessing the feasibility of emotion regulation technology via physiological signals for autistic people are increasingly showing promise, yet to date there has been no exploration of views from the autistic community on the benefits/challenges such technology may present in practice. Focus groups with autistic people and their allies were conducted to gain insight into experiences and expectations of technological supports aimed at supporting emotion regulation. Reflexive thematic analysis generated three themes: (1) communication challenges (2) views on emotion regulation technology (3) 'how' technology is implemented. Results provide meaningful insight into the socio-emotional communication challenges faced by autistic people, and explore the expectations of technology aimed at supporting emotion regulation.
35016969|a|The lack of specific pharmacological therapy for Autistic Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and its clinical heterogeneity demand efforts directed toward the identification of biomarkers to aid in diagnosis. Proteomics offers a new perspective for studying the altered proteins associated with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and we have saliva as an easy-to-collect biological fluid with important biomolecules for investigating biomarkers in various diseases. In this sense, saliva could be used to identify potential biomarkers of ASD. In the current work, saliva samples were collected from children with different degrees of ASD and healthy children and proteomics approaches were applied to generate data on differentially expressed proteins between groups which will serve as a basis for future validation studies as protein markers. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD030065. As results, 132 proteins were present in 80% of the saliva pools of all analyzed groups. Twenty-five proteins were identified as overexpressed in the group of severe and mild/moderate ASD carriers, among which, eight were identified as potential biomarkers for ASD.
26925472|a|CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: In individuals with clinical manifestations the 17q12 recurrent duplication is characterized by intellectual abilities ranging from normal to severe disability and other variable clinical manifestations. Speech delay is common, and most affected individuals have some degree of gross motor delay. Seizures are present in 75%. Up to one third have eye or vision problems; cardiac and renal anomalies occur in rare cases. Other neurodevelopmental and psychiatric conditions reported in a subset of affected individuals are autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, and behavioral abnormalities (aggression and self-injury). The 17q12 recurrent duplication likely has reduced penetrance and variable expressivity since it is inherited in most instances from a parent who is often minimally affected or phenotypically normal. DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The 17q12 recurrent duplication is diagnosed by detection of a 1.4-Mb submicroscopic heterozygous duplication at the approximate position of chr17:34,815,072-36,192,492 Mb [GRCh37/hg19] in the reference genome. Individuals found to have this rare duplication were typically referred for testing because of intellectual disability and/or developmental delays, and occasionally because of multiple congenital anomalies. MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment should be tailored to the specific needs of the individual. Those with developmental delays, cognitive disability, and/or behavioral problems should be evaluated by a neurodevelopmental pediatrician or clinical psychologist/psychiatrist. Seizures should be managed by a neurologist using standard practice. Individuals with cardiac or renal abnormalities should be managed by the appropriate specialist. Surveillance: Regular assessment of psychomotor development is recommended for all children with the 17q12 recurrent duplication as well as psychological evaluation in both affected children and adults. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Presymptomatic diagnosis and treatment is warranted in at-risk relatives to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from close assessment/monitoring of developmental milestones in childhood or psychological assessment/intervention through adulthood. GENETIC COUNSELING: The 17q12 recurrent duplication is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, with approximately 10% of duplications occurring de novo and approximately 90% inherited from a parent who is often minimally affected or phenotypically normal. Prenatal diagnosis for at-risk pregnancies requires prior identification of the duplication in an affected family member. Interpretation of results from prenatal testing is challenging given the inherent difficulty in accurately predicting the phenotype.
35016157|a|BACKGROUND: The aims of this review were to describe exercise interventions, facilitators, and barriers to physical activity for parents of children with autism spectrum disorder. METHODS: A systematic review of the literature, appraising the validity of each article with Melnyk and Fineout-Overholt's level of evidence, from different databases CINAHL, Cochrane, PsycINFO, PubMed, ProQuest, and Web of Science between 2000 and 2020 was conducted. As the initial search revealed no articles on exercise interventions and only 2 articles with children with autism spectrum disorder, the aim was widened to all parents of children. RESULTS: Forty-five articles were identified on barriers to physical activity including being the primary caregiving parent, perception of guilt and selfishness, and adhering to exercise programs they do as part of research, once research ends. Facilitators for physical activity including parents being more likely to exercise if they can bring their child with them and parents preferring exercise that is a lifelong habit, such as walking. CONCLUSIONS: Due to the lack of research on parents of children with autism spectrum disorder, recommendations include development and testing of interventions for parents of children with this condition including family-based exercise interventions where children and parents have a choice to exercise together.
35016084|a|BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Computer aided diagnosis technology has been widely used to diagnose autism spectrum disorder (ASD) from neural images. The performance of the model usually depends largely on a sufficient number of training samples that reflect the real sample distribution. Due to the lack of labelled neural images data, multisite data are often pooled together to expand the sample size. However, the heterogeneity among sites will inevitably lead to a decline in the generalization of models. To solve this problem, we propose a multisource unsupervised domain adaptation method using rough adjoint inconsistency and optimal transport. METHODS: First, we define the concept of rough adjoint inconsistency and propose a double quantization method based on rough adjoint inconsistency and Dempster-Shafer (D-S) evidence theory to estimate the weight coefficient of each source domain to accurately describe the importance of each source domain to the target domain. Second, using optimal transport theory, we weaken the data distribution differences between domains and solve the problem of class imbalance by adjusting the sampling weights among classes. RESULTS: The ASD recognition accuracy of the proposed method is improved on all eight tasks, which are 70.67%, 64.86%, 62.50%, 70.80%, 73.08%, 71.19%, 75.41% and 75.76%, respectively. Our proposed model achieves superior performance compared to traditional machine learning methods and other recently proposed deep learning model. CONCLUSIONS: Our method demonstrates that the fusion of rough adjoint inconsistency and optimal transport can be a powerful tool for identifying ASD and quantifying the correlations between domains.
35016051|a|BACKGROUND: Sedation may be necessary for performing electroencephalograms in children with autistic spectrum disorder, however, our sedation success rate using triclofos sodium (TFS) is limited. Intra-nasal dexmedetomidine (IN-DEX) may be a superior sedative for these children. OBJECTIVE: Compare IN-DEX with TFS for sedation efficacy, resistance to drug delivery and adverse events in children with autism undergoing an electroencephalogram. STUDY DESIGN: A single center, prospective observational study of children with autism sedated for electroencephalograms using IN-DEX compared to an age matched, historic group of children with autism, sedated for electroencephalograms using TFS. RESULTS: Characteristics of 41 IN-DEX sedations were compared to 41 TFS sedations in 82 ASD children. Epileptiform discharges were demonstrated in 23/82 (28%) of children in the cohort. Sedation depth by UMSS was significantly deeper in the IN-DEX group (2.49 +- 0.78 vs. 1.41 +- 0.89, p < 0.001). Electroencephalogram quality demonstrated less motion artifact in the IN-DEX group (1.75 +- 0.76 vs. 2.18 +- 0.88, p < 0.001). The rate of very poor or sedation failure was significantly lower in the IN-DEX group (17% vs 56.1%, p < 0.001), RR = 0.3 (95% CI 0.15 to 0.63, p < 0.001). No major adverse events were documented in either group. Bradycardia occurred in 8/41(19.5%) of children in IN-DEX group and none in TFS group (p = 0.003). Hypotension or poor perfusion were not demonstrated in either group. CONCLUSION: In children with autism undergoing electroencephalograms, IN-DEX was more tolerable than TFS, induced deeper sedation with a greater success rate, and improved electroencephalogram quality. Both sedatives were equally safe in this population.
35015875|a|Autism is a common neurodevelopmental disorder that severely affects patients' quality of life. We aimed to investigate whether acupuncture at Zusanli (ST36) could alleviate the behavior disorder of autistic rats by inhibiting thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP)-mediated activation of NLRP3. An autism model was induced by intraperitoneal injection of pregnant rats with valproic acid (VPA). The pups' behaviors were analyzed using hot plate, open field, Morris water maze, and 3-chamber social interaction tests. Nissl staining was used to visualize neurons in prefrontal cortex. Levels of TXNIP, NLRP3, interleukin (IL)-1beta, and caspase were determined by Western blot or quantitative real-time PCR. After ST36 acupuncture, pain sensitivity, autonomous activity, sociability index, sociability preference index, and learning and memory were improved in the autism model rats. Levels of TXNIP, NLRP3, IL-1beta, and caspase 1 were decreased after acupuncture. Interference with TXNIP alleviated the behavior disorders and inhibited NLRP3, caspase 1, and IL-1beta levels. In summary, ST36 acupuncture reduced TXNIP expression, inhibited the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome, and alleviated the behavior disorder related to the prefrontal cortex of the autistic rats. These results point to a potential mechanism for acupuncture-induced improvement of autistic behavioral disorders.
35013868|a|Some studies report delayed theory of mind (ToM) development in children with specific language impairment (SLI), while others do not. A ToM delay is acknowledged in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), while whether these children also display a deficit is still under debate. In the current study, we drew on a developmental trajectory approach to assess whether children with SLI or ASD displayed delays or deficits in their ToM performance. Forty-three children with SLI (age 4-10 years), 44 children with ASD (age 5-12 years), and 227 typically developing children (age 3-11 years) completed the ToM Storybooks. Children with SLI were not found to display either a delay or a deficit in ToM, while children with ASD were found to display a deficit.
35013867|a|Using the Opportunity-Propensity Model (Byrnes in Dev Rev 56:100911, 2020; Byrnes & Miller in Contemp Educ Psychol 32(4);599-629, 2007), the current study investigated which factors helped predicting children's home learning experiences during the COVID-19 pandemic, thereby examining differences between children with (DD; n = 779) and without (TD; n = 1443) developmental disorders. MANCOVA results indicated more negative experiences for DD children and their parents. SEM-results revealed the alignment between different teachers and autonomous motivation in children as the most important predictors for the outcome variables. Less predictors were significant for DD as compared to TD children which suggests other factors are at play in the DD group. Limitations, strengths and suggestions for future research are being discussed, together with some implications for classroom practices and remote learning approaches.
35013866|a|This double-blind, randomized controlled trial, tested fatty acid (FA) supplementation in children (ages 2- < 6 years) recently diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Participants received daily oral FA supplement containing omega-3 and omega-6 FA, or a placebo for 90 days based on participant weight. Erythrocyte FAs and the cytokines, IL-1beta, IL-2, IFNgamma, were measured in plasma obtained from serial blood collections. Treatment increased omega-3 and omega-6 FA levels (1.40 mol% for EPA and 1.62 mol% for DHA) and reduced IL-2 levels compared to placebo (- 0.17 pg/mL, 95% CI - 0.31, - 0.02, d = - 0.62). Omega 3-6 treatment was tolerable and adherence was greater than 70%. Future research will assess the effects of Omega 3-6 treatment on ASD symptoms. Registered on 06/08/2018 with ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT03550209.
35013163|a|Previous research suggests an association of loneliness and social isolation (LNL-ISO) with schizophrenia. Here, we demonstrate a LNL-ISO polygenic score contribution to schizophrenia risk in an independent case-control sample (N = 3,488). We then subset schizophrenia predisposing variation based on its effect on LNL-ISO. We find that genetic variation with concordant effects in both phenotypes shows significant SNP-based heritability enrichment, higher polygenic contribution in females, and positive covariance with mental disorders such as depression, anxiety, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, alcohol dependence, and autism. Conversely, genetic variation with discordant effects only contributes to schizophrenia risk in males and is negatively correlated with those disorders. Mendelian randomization analyses demonstrate a plausible bi-directional causal relationship between LNL-ISO and schizophrenia, with a greater effect of LNL-ISO liability on schizophrenia than vice versa. These results illustrate the genetic footprint of LNL-ISO on schizophrenia.
35013130|a|Psychiatric disorders are highly prevalent and display considerable clinical and genetic overlap. Dopaminergic and serotonergic neurotransmission have been shown to play an important role in many psychiatric disorders. Here we aim to assess the genetic contribution of these systems to eight psychiatric disorders (attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), anorexia nervosa (ANO), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), bipolar disorder (BIP), major depression (MD), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), schizophrenia (SCZ) and Tourette's syndrome (TS)) using publicly available GWAS analyses performed by the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium that include more than 160,000 cases and 275,000 controls. To do so, we elaborated four different gene sets: two 'wide' selections for dopamine (DA) and for serotonin (SERT) using the Gene Ontology and KEGG pathways tools, and two'core' selections for the same systems, manually curated. At the gene level, we found 67 genes from the DA and/or SERT gene sets significantly associated with one of the studied disorders, and 12 of them were associated with two different disorders. Gene-set analysis revealed significant associations for ADHD and ASD with the wide DA gene set, for BIP with the wide SERT gene set, and for MD with the core SERT set. Interestingly, interrogation of a cross-disorder GWAS meta-analysis of the eight psychiatric conditions displayed association with the wide DA gene set. To our knowledge, this is the first systematic examination of genes encoding proteins essential to the function of these two neurotransmitter systems in these disorders. Our results support a pleiotropic contribution of the dopaminergic and serotonergic systems in several psychiatric conditions.
35013113|a|The CACNA1C (calcium voltage-gated channel subunit alpha 1 C) gene that encodes the CaV1.2 channel is a prominent risk gene for neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders with cognitive and social impairments like schizophrenia, bipolar disorders, depression and autistic spectrum disorders (ASD). We have shown previously that mice with exon 33 deleted from CaV1.2 channel (CaV1.2-exon 33-/-) displayed increased CaV1.2 current density and single channel open probability in cardiomyocytes, and were prone to develop arrhythmia. As Ca2+ entry through CaV1.2 channels activates gene transcription in response to synaptic activity, we were intrigued to explore the possible role of Cav1.2Delta33 channels in synaptic plasticity and behaviour. Homozygous deletion of alternative exon 33 resulted in enhanced long-term potentiation (LTP), and lack of long- term depression (LTD), which did not correlate with enhanced learning. Exon 33 deletion also led to a decrease in social dominance, sociability and social novelty. Our findings shed light on the effect of gain-of-function of CaV1.2Delta33 signalling on synaptic plasticity and behaviour and provides evidence for a link between CaV1.2 and distinct cognitive and social behaviours associated with phenotypic features of psychiatric disorders like schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and ASD.
35013067|a|OBJECTIVES: Training pediatricians in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) in early diagnosis and comprehensive management of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is crucial to ensure optimal developmental outcomes for a substantial number of children with ASD in this region. This study evaluates the relevance and effectiveness of an evidence-based telementoring model Extension for Community Healthcare Outcomes (ECHO) Autism in increasing pediatricians' access to best-practice care for children with ASD in LMIC contexts. METHODS: ECHO Autism was launched by a [DOUBLE HIGH-REVERSED-9 QUOTATION MARK]hub" team of multidisciplinary ASD experts at a child development center in Mumbai, India. The culturally modified model included 13 biweekly sessions conducted annually using video-conferencing technology. Sessions combined expert-delivered didactics and facilitated case-based discussions on best-practice methods in screening, diagnosing, and managing autism and its comorbidities. Sixty-two physicians, including 59 pediatricians across 2 cohorts (2019-2020), participated in the mixed-methods study to evaluate participants' reactions, knowledge, behaviors, and impact on children and families. RESULTS: Participants represented a broad geographic reach across India (n = 47) and other LMICs (n = 15). Both quantitative and qualitative data revealed high levels of participant satisfaction and improved knowledge and self-efficacy in ASD diagnosis and management. Qualitative themes highlighted the adult-learning processes of ECHO Autism that participants considered novel and beneficial, such as reflective discussions, respectful mentoring, having a parent as [DOUBLE HIGH-REVERSED-9 QUOTATION MARK]expert," and cultural relevance, alongside changes in practice behaviors. CONCLUSION: ECHO Autism clinics facilitated by local experts in LMICs can improve access to early diagnosis and evidence-based, comprehensive management for children with ASD and their families by positively influencing pediatricians' knowledge, attitudes, and practice behaviors.
35012703|a|
35012685|a|1,3-Butadiene (BD) is a petrochemical manufactured in high volumes. It is a human carcinogen and can induce lymphohematopoietic cancers, particularly leukemia, in occupationally-exposed workers. BD is an air pollutant with the major environmental sources being automobile exhaust and tobacco smoke. It is one of the major constituents and is considered the most carcinogenic compound in cigarette smoke. The BD concentrations in urban areas usually vary between 0.01 and 3.3 mug/m3 but can be significantly higher in some microenvironments. For BD exposure of the general population, microenvironments, particularly indoor microenvironments, are the primary determinant and environmental tobacco smoke is the main contributor. BD has high cancer risk and has been ranked the second or the third in the environmental pollutants monitored in most urban areas, with the cancer risks exceeding 10-5. Mutagenicity/carcinogenicity of BD is mediated by its genotoxic metabolites but the specific metabolite(s) responsible for the effects in humans have not been determined. BD can be bioactivated to yield three mutagenic epoxide metabolites by cytochrome P450 enzymes, or potentially be biotransformed into a mutagenic chlorohydrin by myeloperoxidase, a peroxidase almost specifically present in neutrophils and monocytes. Several urinary BD biomarkers have been developed, among which N-acetyl-S-(4-hydroxy-2-buten-1-yl)-L-cysteine is the most sensitive and is suitable for biomonitoring BD exposure in the general population. Exposure to BD has been associated with leukemia, cardiovascular disease, and possibly reproductive effects, and may be associated with several cancers, autism, and asthma in children. Collectively, BD is a ubiquitous pollutant that has been associated with a range of adverse health effects and diseases with children being a subpopulation with potentially greater susceptibility. Its adverse effects on human health may have been underestimated and more studies are needed.
35012645|a|BACKGROUND: Autistic individuals frequently experience social communication challenges. Girls are diagnosed with autism less often than boys even when their symptoms are equally severe, which may be due to insufficient understanding of the way autism manifests in girls. Differences in the behavioral presentation of autism, including how people talk about social topics, could contribute to these persistent problems with identification. Despite a growing body of research suggesting that autistic girls and boys present distinct symptom profiles in a variety of domains, including social attention, friendships, social motivation, and language, differences in the way that autistic boys and girls communicate verbally are not yet well understood. Closely analyzing boys' and girls' socially-focused language during semi-structured clinical assessments could shed light on potential sex differences in the behavioral presentation of autistic individuals that may prove useful for identifying and effectively supporting autistic girls. Here, we compare social word use in verbally fluent autistic girls and boys during the interview sections of the ADOS-2 Module 3 and measure associations with clinical phenotype. METHODS: School-aged girls and boys with autism (N = 101, 25 females; aged 6-15) were matched on age, IQ, and parent/clinician ratings of autism symptom severity. Our primary analysis compared the number of social words produced by autistic boys and girls (normalized to account for differences in total word production). Social words are words that make reference to other people, including friends and family. RESULTS: There was a significant main effect of sex on social word production, such that autistic girls used more social words than autistic boys. To identify the specific types of words driving this effect, additional subcategories of friend and family words were analyzed. There was a significant effect of sex on friend words, with girls using significantly more friend words than boys. However, there was no significant main effect of sex on family words, suggesting that sex differences in social word production may be driven by girls talking more about friends compared to boys, not family. To assess relationships between word use and clinical phenotype, we modeled ADOS-2 Social Affect (SA) scores as a function of social word production. In the overall sample, social word use correlated significantly with ADOS-2 SA scores, indicating that participants who used more social words were rated as less socially impaired by clinicians. However, when examined in each sex separately, this result only held for boys. LIMITATIONS: This study cannot speak to the ways in which social word use may differ for younger children, adults, or individuals who are not verbally fluent; in addition, there were more autistic boys than girls in our sample, making it difficult to detect small effects. CONCLUSIONS: Autistic girls used significantly more social words than boys during a diagnostic assessment-despite being matched on age, IQ, and both parent- and clinician-rated autism symptom severity. Sex differences in linguistic markers of social phenotype in autism are especially important in light of the late or missed diagnoses that disproportionately affect autistic girls. Specifically, heightened talk about social topics could complicate autism referral and diagnosis when non-clinician observers expect a male-typical pattern of reduced social focus, which autistic girls may not always exhibit.
35012536|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complex developmental range of conditions that involves difficulties with social interaction and restricted/repetitive behaviors. Unfortunately, health care providers often experience difficulties in diagnosis and management of individuals with ASD, and may have no knowledge about possible ways to overcome barriers in ASD patient interactions in healthcare settings. At the same time, the provision of appropriate medical services can have positive effects on habilitative progress, functional outcome, life expectancy and quality of life for individuals with ASD. METHODS: This online survey research study evaluated the awareness and experience of students/residents (n = 247) and physicians (n = 100) in the medical management of children with ASD. It also gathered the views and experiences of caregivers to children with ASD (n = 158), all based in Russia. RESULTS: We have established that the Russian medical community has limited ASD knowledge among providers, and have suggested possible reasons for this. Based on results from online surveys completed by students/residents, non-psychiatric physicians, and caregivers of children diagnosed with ASD, the main problems pertaining to medical management of individuals with ASD were identified. Possible problem solving solutions within medical practice were proposed. CONCLUSIONS: The results from this study should be considered when implementing measures to improve healthcare practices, and when developing models for effective medical management, due to start not only in Russia but also in a number of other countries.
35012378|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Mounting evidence indicates the contribution of early life environmental factors in autism spectrum disorder. We aim to report the prospective associations between early life environmental factors and autism spectrum disorder symptoms in children at the age of 2 years in a population-derived birth cohort, the Barwon Infant Study. Autism spectrum disorder symptoms at the age of 2 years strongly predicted autism spectrum disorder diagnosis by the age of 4 years (area under curve = 0.93; 95% CI (0.82, 1.00)). After adjusting for child's sex and age at the time of behavioural assessment, markers of socioeconomic disadvantage, such as lower household income and lone parental status; maternal health factors, including younger maternal age, maternal pre-pregnancy body mass index, higher gestational weight gain and prenatal maternal stress; maternal lifestyle factors, such as prenatal alcohol and environmental air pollutant exposures, including particulate matter < 2.5 mum at birth, child secondhand tobacco smoke at 12 months, dampness/mould and home heating with oil, kerosene or diesel heaters at 2 years postnatal. Lower socioeconomic indexes for area, later birth order, higher maternal prenatal depression and maternal smoking frequency had a dose-response relationship with autism spectrum disorder symptoms. Future studies on environmental factors and autism spectrum disorder should consider the reasons for the socioeconomic disparity and the combined impact of multiple environmental factors through common mechanistic pathways.
35012288|a|Autism is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder, the prevalence of which has increased drastically in India in recent years. Neuroligin is a type I transmembrane protein that plays a crucial role in synaptogenesis. Alterations in synaptic genes are most commonly implicated in autism and other cognitive disorders. The present study investigated the neuroligin 3 gene in the Indian autistic population by sequencing and in silico pathogenicity prediction of molecular changes. In total, 108 clinically described individuals with autism were included from the North Karnataka region of India, along with 150 age-, sex-, and ethnicity-matched healthy controls. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood, and exonic regions were sequenced. The functional and structural effects of variants of the neuroligin 3 protein were predicted. One coding sequence variant (a missense variant) and four non-coding variants (two 5'-untranslated region [UTR] variants and two 3'-UTR variants) were recorded. The novel missense variant was found in 25% of the autistic population. The C/C genotype of c.551T>C was significantly more common in autistic children than in controls (p = 0.001), and a significantly increased risk of autism (24.7-fold) was associated with this genotype (p = 0.001). The missense variant showed pathogenic effects and high evolutionary conservation over the functions of the neuroligin 3 protein. In the present study, we reported a novel missense variant, V184A, which causes abnormal neuroligin 3 and was found with high frequency in the Indian autistic population. Therefore, neuroligin is a candidate gene for future molecular investigations and functional analysis in the Indian autistic population.
35011884|a|Patients with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) display distinctive neurophysiological characteristics associated with significant cognitive, emotional, and behavioral symptoms. Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) applied to the frontal or temporoparietal lobes has demonstrated potential to reduce the severity of ASD-related symptoms. Recently, the cerebellum has been identified as a brain area involved in ASD pathophysiology. In this open-label pilot study, seven ASD patients aged between 9 and 13 years underwent 20 daily sessions of 20 min cathodal stimulation of the right cerebellar lobe. At the end of the treatment, the Aberrant Behavior Checklist (ABC) scores showed a 25% mean reduction in global severity of symptoms, with a more pronounced reduction in the "social withdrawal and lethargy" (-35%), "hyperactivity and noncompliance" (-26%), and "irritability, agitation, and crying" (-25%) subscales. Minor and no improvement were observed in the "stereotypic behavior" (-18%) and "inappropriate speech" (-0%) subscales, respectively. Improvements were not detected in the two patients who were taking psychotropic drugs during the study. Clinical response showed a symptom-specific time course. Quality of sleep and mood improved earlier than hyperactivity and social withdrawal. The treatment was generally accepted by patients and well tolerated. No serious adverse events were reported. Stimulation also appeared to markedly reduce the severity of tics in a patient with comorbid tic disorder and led to the disappearance of a frontal epileptogenic focus in another patient with a history of seizures. In conclusion, cerebellar tDCS is safe, feasible, and potentially effective in the treatment of ASD symptoms among children. Strategies to improve recruitment and retention are discussed.
35011736|a|Teneurin 4 (TENM4) is a transmembrane protein that is codified by the ODZ4 gene and is involved in nervous system development, neurite outgrowth, and neuronal differentiation. In line with its involvement in the nervous system, TENM4 has also been implicated in several mental disorders such as bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and autism. TENM4 mutations and rearrangements have recently been identified in a number of tumors. This, combined with impaired expression in tumors, suggests that it may potentially be involved in tumorigenesis. Most of the TENM4 mutations that are observed in tumors occur in breast cancer, in which TENM4 plays a role in cells' migration and stemness. However, the functional role that TENM4 plays in breast cancer still needs to be better evaluated, and further studies are required to better understand the involvement of TENM4 in breast cancer progression. Herein, we review the currently available data for TENM4's role in breast cancer and propose its use as both a novel target with which to ameliorate patient prognosis and as a potential biomarker. Moreover, we also report data on the tumorigenic role of miR-708 deregulation and the possible use of this miRNA as a novel therapeutic molecule, as miR-708 is spliced out from TENM4 mRNA.
35011630|a|Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common inherited cause of autism and intellectual disability. The majority of FXS cases are caused by transcriptional repression of the FMR1 gene due to epigenetic changes that are not recapitulated in current animal disease models. FXS patient induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived gene edited reporter cell lines enable novel strategies to discover reactivators of FMR1 expression in human cells on a much larger scale than previously possible. Here, we describe the workflow using FXS iPSC-derived neural cell lines to conduct a massive, unbiased screen for small molecule activators of the FMR1 gene. The proof-of-principle methodology demonstrates the utility of human stem-cell-based methodology for the untargeted discovery of reactivators of the human FMR1 gene that can be applied to other diseases.
35011609|a|Protein phosphorylation plays critical roles in a variety of intracellular signaling pathways and physiological functions that are controlled by neurotransmitters and neuromodulators in the brain. Dysregulation of these signaling pathways has been implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and schizophrenia. While recent advances in mass spectrometry-based proteomics have allowed us to identify approximately 280,000 phosphorylation sites, it remains largely unknown which sites are phosphorylated by which kinases. To overcome this issue, previously, we developed methods for comprehensive screening of the target substrates of given kinases, such as PKA and Rho-kinase, upon stimulation by extracellular signals and identified many candidate substrates for specific kinases and their phosphorylation sites. Here, we developed a novel online database to provide information about the phosphorylation signals identified by our methods, as well as those previously reported in the literature. The "KANPHOS" (Kinase-Associated Neural Phospho-Signaling) database and its web portal were built based on a next-generation XooNIps neuroinformatics tool. To explore the functionality of the KANPHOS database, we obtained phosphoproteomics data for adenosine-A2A-receptor signaling and its downstream MAPK-mediated signaling in the striatum/nucleus accumbens, registered them in KANPHOS, and analyzed the related pathways.
35011572|a|Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), including autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and intellectual disability (ID), are a large group of neuropsychiatric illnesses that occur during early brain development, resulting in a broad spectrum of syndromes affecting cognition, sociability, and sensory and motor functions. Despite progress in the discovery of various genetic risk factors thanks to the development of novel genomics technologies, the precise pathological mechanisms underlying the onset of NDDs remain elusive owing to the profound genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity of these conditions. Autism susceptibility candidate 2 (AUTS2) has emerged as a crucial gene associated with a wide range of neuropsychological disorders, such as ASD, ID, schizophrenia, and epilepsy. AUTS2 has been shown to be involved in multiple neurodevelopmental processes; in cell nuclei, it acts as a key transcriptional regulator in neurodevelopment, whereas in the cytoplasm, it participates in cerebral corticogenesis, including neuronal migration and neuritogenesis, through the control of cytoskeletal rearrangements. Postnatally, AUTS2 regulates the number of excitatory synapses to maintain the balance between excitation and inhibition in neural circuits. In this review, we summarize the knowledge regarding AUTS2, including its molecular and cellular functions in neurodevelopment, its genetics, and its role in behaviors.
35011571|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with strong genetic influences. There is an increasing demand for ASD genetic testing beyond the traditionally recommended microarray and syndromic autism testing; however, the current whole genome sequencing (WGS) and whole exome sequencing (WES) methods are lacking an academic standard for WGS variant annotation, reporting, and interpretation, tailored towards patients with ASD and offer very limited interpretation for clinical significance. Using WGS data from six family trios, we demonstrate the clinical feasibility and technical implementation of an evidence-based, fully transparent bioinformatics pipeline and report framework for an ASD-focused WGS genetic report. We confirmed a portion of the key variants with Sanger sequencing and provided interpretation with consideration of patients' clinical symptoms and detailed literature review. Furthermore, we showed that identification of the genetic contributions of ASD core symptoms and comorbidities may promote a better understanding of the ASD pathophysiology, lead to early detection of associated comorbidities, and facilitate pharmacologic intervention based on pathological pathways inferred from the genetic information. We will make the bioinformatics pipeline and interpretation framework publicly available, in an easily accessible format, after validation with a larger cohort. We hope that the present proposed protocol can serve as a starting point to invite discourse and debate to further improve approaches in WGS-based genetic consultation for patients with ASD.
35010940|a|Dysbiosis secondary to environmental factors, including dietary patterns, antibiotics use, pollution exposure, and other lifestyle factors, has been associated to many non-infective chronic inflammatory diseases. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is related to maternal inflammation, although there is no conclusive evidence that affected individuals suffer from systemic low-grade inflammation as in many psychological and psychiatric diseases. However, neuro-inflammation and neuro-immune abnormalities are observed within ASD-affected individuals. Rebalancing human gut microbiota to treat disease has been widely investigated with inconclusive and contradictory findings. These observations strongly suggest that the forms of dysbiosis encountered in ASD-affected individuals could also originate from autonomic nervous system (ANS) functioning abnormalities, a common neuro-anatomical alteration underlying ASD. According to this hypothesis, overactivation of the sympathetic branch of the ANS, due to the fact of an ASD-specific parasympathetic activity deficit, induces deregulation of the gut-brain axis, attenuating intestinal immune and osmotic homeostasis. This sets-up a dysbiotic state, that gives rise to immune and osmotic dysregulation, maintaining dysbiosis in a vicious cycle. Here, we explore the mechanisms whereby ANS imbalances could lead to alterations in intestinal microbiome-host interactions that may contribute to the severity of ASD by maintaining the brain-gut axis pathways in a dysregulated state.
35010918|a|Previous studies have shown that exclusive breastfeeding is associated with lower odds of having autism spectrum disorders (ASD) in children, but data are lacking in Asian countries, especially China. This cross-sectional study of seven cities in China collected data from August 2016 to March 2017 from 6049 toddlers aged 16-30 months and their parents who responded to questionnaires. The breastfeeding status was collected via questionnaires based on recommendations from the World Health Organization. The standard procedure for screening and diagnosis was applied to identify toddlers with ASD. Among the 6049 toddlers (3364 boys [55.6%]; mean [SD] age, 22.7 [4.1] months), 71 toddlers (1.2%) were identified as ASD. The prevalence of exclusive breastfeeding, partial breastfeeding, and not breastfeeding was 48.8%, 42.2%, and 9.1%, respectively. Compared to toddlers with exclusive breastfeeding, toddlers with partial breastfeeding or without breastfeeding had higher odds of having ASD (odd ratios [OR]: 1.55, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.90-2.74; OR: 2.34, 95% CI: 1.10-4.82). We did not find significant modification of demographic characteristics on the associations. The results remained robust in multiple sensitivity analyses. Toddlers without breastfeeding for the first six months of life had higher odds of having ASD, and our findings shed light on the necessity of strengthening public health efforts to increase exclusive breastfeeding in China.
35010901|a|Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) present with persistent deficits in both social communication and interactions, along with the presence of restricted and repetitive behaviors, resulting in significant impairment in significant areas of functioning. Children with ASD consistently reported significantly lower vitamin D levels than typically developing children. Moreover, vitamin D deficiency was found to be strongly correlated with ASD severity. Theoretically, vitamin D can affect neurodevelopment in children with ASD through its anti-inflammatory properties, stimulating the production of neurotrophins, decreasing the risk of seizures, and regulating glutathione and serotonin levels. A Title/Abstract specific search for publications on Vitamin D supplementation trials up to June 2021 was performed using two databases: PubMed and Cochrane Library. Twelve experimental studies were included in the synthesis of this review. Children with ASD reported a high prevalence of vitamin D deficiency or insufficiency. In general, it was observed that improved vitamin D status significantly reduced the ASD severity, however, this effect was not consistently different between the treatment and control groups. The variations in vitamin D dose protocols and the presence of concurrent interventions might provide an explanation for the variability of results. The age of the child for introducing vitamin D intervention was identified as a possible factor determining the effectiveness of the treatment. Common limitations included a small number of participants and a short duration of follow-ups in the selected studies. Long-term, well-designed randomized controlled trials are warranted to confirm the effect of vitamin D on severity in children with ASD.
35010379|a|BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) cases is increasing in Taiwan. Genetic testing for children with ASD offers several potential benefits and is available with out-of-pocket expenses. Parents play a pivotal role in having their children with ASD tested; therefore, understanding their perceptions of, and perceived barriers to genetic testing is vital. METHODS: Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 39 parents of children with ASD in Taiwan. Interviews were recorded and transcribed verbatim. NVivo 12 software (QSR International, Doncaster, Australia) was used to facilitate an inductive coding methodology. RESULTS: The majority of participants (74.4%) supported ASD genetic testing for their children with ASD, citing reasons such as clarifying ASD etiology, well-informed family planning, contributing to ASD research, and early ASD detection and intervention. Others indicated that they were either against such testing (17.9%), or unsure (7.7%) about whether to take their children with ASD for genetic testing. Those who were opposed reported that their main concerns related to perceptions of no value of genetic testing, potential for family conflict, and financial difficulties. CONCLUSIONS: Most of the parents of children with ASD that we interviewed expressed favorable views of ASD genetic testing. There exists a need to increase parental access to education and counseling, and to include testing coverage in Taiwanese national health insurance.
35009623|a|Social interactions significantly impact the quality of life for people with special needs (e.g., older adults with dementia and children with autism). They may suffer loneliness and social isolation more often than people without disabilities. There is a growing demand for technologies to satisfy the social needs of such user groups. However, evaluating these systems can be challenging due to the extra difficulty of gathering data from people with special needs (e.g., communication barriers involving older adults with dementia and children with autism). Thus, in this systematic review, we focus on studying data gathering methods for evaluating socially assistive systems (SAS). Six academic databases (i.e., Scopus, Web of Science, ACM, Science Direct, PubMed, and IEEE Xplore) were searched, covering articles published from January 2000 to July 2021. A total of 65 articles met the inclusion criteria for this systematic review. The results showed that existing SASs most often targeted people with visual impairments, older adults, and children with autism. For instance, a common type of SASs aimed to help blind people perceive social signals (e.g., facial expressions). SASs were most commonly assessed with interviews, questionnaires, and observation data. Around half of the interview studies only involved target users, while the other half also included secondary users or stakeholders. Questionnaires were mostly used with older adults and people with visual impairments to measure their social interaction, emotional state, and system usability. A great majority of observational studies were carried out with users in special age groups, especially older adults and children with autism. We thereby contribute an overview of how different data gathering methods were used with various target users of SASs. Relevant insights are extracted to inform future development and research.
35007869|a|The behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) is characterised by pronounced alterations in social functioning, including the understanding of others' thoughts and feelings via theory of mind. The emergence of such impairments in other social disorders such as autism and schizophrenia is suggested to reflect an inability to imagine the other person's visual perspective of the world. To our knowledge, relationships between visual perspective taking and theory of mind have not previously been explored in bvFTD. Here, we sought to examine the capacity for visual perspective taking and theory of mind in bvFTD, and to establish their inter-relationships and underlying neural correlates. Fifteen bvFTD patients and 15 healthy Controls completed a comprehensive battery of perspective taking measures, comprising Level 1 ('what') and Level 2 ('how') visual perspective taking tasks, a cartoon task capturing theory of mind, and a questionnaire assessing subjective perspective taking in daily life. Compared with Controls, bvFTD patients displayed significant impairments across all perspective taking measures. These perspective taking impairments, however, were not correlated with one another in bvFTD. Region-of-interest voxel-based morphometry analyses suggested distinct neural correlates for visual perspective taking (inferior frontal gyrus) versus theory of mind (medial prefrontal cortex, precuneus), which appeared to partially overlap with those implicated in subjective perspective taking (inferior frontal gyrus, precuneus, temporoparietal junction). Despite pervasive impairments in all aspects of perspective taking in bvFTD, these did not appear to relate to one another at the behavioural or neural level in our study. Future large-scale studies manipulating discrete aspects of the tasks will help to clarify the neurocognitive mechanisms of, and relationships between, visual perspective taking and theory of mind in bvFTD, along with their real-world implications.
35007668|a|Visual attention of young children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has been well documented in the literature for the past 20 years. In this study, we developed a Decision Support System (DSS) that uses machine learning (ML) techniques to identify young children with ASD from typically developing (TD) children. Study participants included 26 to 36 months old young children with ASD (n = 61) and TD children (n = 72). The results showed that the proposed DSS achieved up to 87.5% success rate in the early assessment of ASD in young children. Findings suggested that visual attention is a unique, promising biomarker for early assessment of ASD. Study results were discussed, and suggestions for future research were provided.
35006555|a|Existing data demonstrate a significant correlation between autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and the status of biologically essential and toxic trace elements. However, there is still a lack of data on the steady state of trace elements in ASD. We performed a case-control study to explore the association between the risk of ASD and 23 trace elements in plasma. The results showed that children with ASD had considerably decreased lithium (Li), manganese (Mn), selenium (Se), barium (Ba), mercury (Hg), and tin (Sn) levels when compared to their age- and sex-matched controls. Meanwhile, children with ASD had considerably increased plasma chromium (Cr) and vanadium (V) concentrations. We also divided each group into subgroups based on age and gender and created element-related networks for each subgroup. We detected significant element correlations within or between subgroups, as well as changes in correlations that included all elements examined. Finally, more element correlations were observed among males, which may open a new avenue for understanding the complicated process behind the sex ratio of children with ASD. Overall, our data revealed a novel relationship between elements and ASD, which may extend current understanding about ASD.
35006113|a|ABSTRACT: Cowden disease is associated with neurodevelopmental abnormalities such as macrocephaly, autism spectrum disorder, and developmental delay. Our understanding of neuroimaging anomalies in patients with PTEN mutations is limited to anatomical MRI abnormalities including white matter abnormalities, meningiomas, arteriovenous malformations, and cortical dysplasia. Our current communication extends the neurological Cowden syndrome phenotype by using brain 18F-FDG PET/CT imaging as a useful complementary approach to MRI to explore movement disorders and neuropsychiatric syndromes in a patient with Cowden disease. Brain 18F-FDG PET/CT showed diffuse hypometabolism of the prefrontal mesial and dorsolateral areas including supplementary motor areas, the pons extended to the cerebellum.
35005839|a|EEG microstates represent transient electrocortical events that reflect synchronized activities of large-scale networks, which allows investigations of brain dynamics with sub-second resolution. We recorded resting EEG from 38 children and adolescents with Autism Spectrum Development (ASD) and 48 age, IQ, sex, and handedness-matched typically developing (TD) participants. The EEG was segmented into a time series of microstates using modified k-means clustering of scalp voltage topographies. The frequency and global explained variance (GEV) of a specific microstate (type C) were significantly lower in the ASD group compared to the TD group while the duration of the same microstate was correlated with the presence of ASD-related behaviors. The duration of this microstate was also positively correlated with participant age in the TD group, but not in the ASD group. Further, the frequency and duration of the microstate were significantly correlated with the overall alpha power only in the TD group. The signal strength and GEV for another microstate (type G) was greater in the ASD group than the TD group, and the associated topographical pattern differed between groups with greater variations in the ASD group. While more work is needed to clarify the underlying neural sources, the existing literature supports associations between the two microstates and the default mode and salience networks. The current study suggests specific alterations of temporal dynamics of the resting cortical network activities as well as their developmental trajectories and relationships to alpha power, which has been proposed to reflect reduced neural inhibition in ASD. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
35005585|a|Background: Exposure to vitamin D in early life has been associated with improved bone mineralization, but no studies have investigated the combined effect of pregnancy supplementation and childhood 25(OH)D concentrations on bone health. Methods: We analyzed the effect of serum 25(OH)D concentrations at age 6 months and 6 years and the combined effect with prenatal high-dose vitamin D (2800 vs. 400 IU/day) on bone mineral density (BMD) and content (BMC) assessed by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scans at age 3 and 6 years and longitudinal risk of fractures in a double-blinded, randomized clinical trial in the Copenhagen Prospective Studies on Asthma in Childhood 2010 (COPSAC2010) mother-child cohort with enrollment from March 4, 2009, to November 17, 2010, and clinical follow-up until January 31, 2019 (NCT00856947). All participants randomized to intervention and with complete data were included in the analyses. Findings: At age 6 months, serum 25(OH)D concentration was measured in 93% (n = 541) of 584 children. Children with sufficient (>= 75 nmol/l) vs. insufficient (< 75 nmol/l) concentrations did not have lower risk of fractures: incidence rate ratio (95% CI); 0.64 (0.37;1.11), p = 0.11. However, vitamin D sufficient children from mothers receiving high-dose supplementation during pregnancy had a 60% reduced incidence of fractures compared with vitamin D insufficient children from mothers receiving standard-dose: 0.40 (0.19;0.84), p = 0.02.At age 6 years, serum 25(OH)D concentration was measured in 83% (n = 318) of 383 children with available DXA data. Whole-body bone mineralization was higher in vitamin D sufficient children at age 6 years; BMD, adjusted mean difference (aMD) (95% CI): 0.011 g/cm2 (0.001;0.021), p = 0.03, and BMC, aMD: 12.3 g (-0.8;25.4), p = 0.07, with the largest effect in vitamin D sufficient children from mothers receiving high-dose vitamin D supplementation; BMD, aMD: 0.016 g/cm2 (0.002;0.030), p = 0.03, and BMC, aMD: 23.5 g (5.5;41.5), p = 0.01. Interpretation: Childhood vitamin D sufficiency improved bone mineralization and in combination with prenatal high-dose vitamin D supplementation reduced the risk of fractures. Funding: The study was supported by The Lundbeck Foundation R16-A1694, The Danish Ministry of Health 903,516, The Danish Council for Strategic Research 0603-00280B and The European Research Council 946,228.
35005218|a|Most studies examine treatment relapse by programming contextual changes with perfect treatment integrity or with omission errors in the absence of a context change (i.e., all alternative responses placed on extinction). Recently, Mitteer et al. (2018) examined caregiver behavior in response to a confederate playing the role of a child with destructive behavior, providing the opportunity for researchers to empirically derive reinforcement schedules and test caregiver error patterns within future relapse tests with children. The present study represents a pilot demonstration of methods for reverse translating findings from caregivers to relapse preparations with children. We used a human-operant arrangement with three children with autism spectrum disorder in which they (a) emitted a target response (i.e., pad touch) for a preferred item in a home-like context, (b) emitted an alternative response (e.g., card touch) for the item in a clinic context while the target response was extinguished, and (c) experienced a relapse test in which the experimenter programmed the same low-rate omission and commission errors that caregivers made in the prior study within the home-like context. During the relapse test, target responding approximated or exceeded baseline ranges for all cases, and alternative behavior extinguished for two of the three cases. We discuss how researchers might incorporate similar translation processes in future relapse research.
35004388|a|Introduction: Scurvy is a rarely seen in pediatric patients nowadays, seen more in those with developmental delay, autism or those who are severely malnourished. Epiphyseal separations are known to occur in scurvy, but only a few such cases have been reported in children with cerebral palsy. The diagnosis is often misleading since other morbidities as trauma, malignancies, coagulopathies, septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, or rheumatologic disorders are often considered at first. We report the case of 4-year-old female child with cerebral palsy in whom the initial concern was septic arthritis/osteomyelitis based upon clinical presentation, ultrasonic and magnetic resonance imaging, led to a surgery revealing subperiosteal hematomas. Case Report: A 4-year-old girl was admitted in the pediatrics department for fever and bilateral knee joint pain for 3 days. She was a diagnosed case of with cerebral palsy, psyco-developmental delay, and epileptogenic disorder put under valproic acid. She was toxic and febrile. Within 4 h after admission, both knees developed tense shiny intense swelling associated with pain, redness, and local rise of temperature with limited active range of motion. Near-complete passive range of motion was noted. There were no abnormal findings on the rest of the musculoskeletal examination. Aspiration of the knee revealed subperiosteal hematoma diagnostic of scurvy. Conclusion: Scurvy is exceedingly rare in children nowadays; however, its presentation among risky populations should not be forgotten. Musculoskeletal revelations, mostly subperiosteal hematoma, are the main manifestation of scurvy in the pediatric population. Scurvy as a differential diagnosis for trauma, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis will always be a bane for orthopedic surgeons. A heightened awareness is needed to avoid unnecessary surgery, unnecessary tests, and procedures and to be able to start treatment for a potentially fatal but easily curable disease.
35003921|a|Background: Research shows that people with autism spectrum disorder and their families often experience social stigma. The internalization of social stigma can lead to the occurrence of self-stigma, understood as an internalized cognitive-affective self-directed and rigid process that results in individuals agreeing with stigmatizing opinions and applying them to themselves. Experiencing self-stigma can lead to a cognitive fusion with negative thoughts-especially those about oneself. Previous studies show that self-compassion reduces feelings of suffering, shame and self-stigma in a group of parents of children with autism spectrum disorder. The aim of this study was to test the relationship between self-stigma and cognitive fusion among parents of children with ASD. The moderating role of self-compassion as a protective factor was also verified. Methods: The following questionnaires were used: Perceived Public Stigma Scale, Perceived Courtesy Stigma Scale, Self-Compassion Scale-Short Form, Cognitive Fusion Questionnaire, and Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale. The study included 233 Polish parents of children with autism spectrum disorder (including 218 women). Results: The results showed a positive correlation between fusion and both affiliate (r = 0.31, p < 0.001) and public stigma (r = 0.33, p < 0.001). Fusion and self-compassion were significant predictors of affiliate stigma. Self-compassion moderated the relationship between fusion and depression (beta = -0.11, p < 0.05) and the relationship between fusion and stress (beta = -0.11, p < 0.05). Cognitive fusion with negative beliefs about oneself can contribute to self-stigma. Defusion-oriented actions are an opportunity to distance oneself from emerging thoughts and eliminate their negative consequences. Self-compassion manifests itself in a compassionate and accepting attitude towards oneself and improves the individual's well-being. Actions taken to strengthen the indicated factors could contribute to a better quality of life of parents of children with ASD.
35002916|a|Background: SCN1A is one of the most common epilepsy genes. About 80% of SCN1A gene mutations cause Dravet syndrome (DS), which is a severe and catastrophic epileptic encephalopathy. More than 1,800 mutations have been identified in SCN1A. Although it is known that SCN1A is the main cause of DS and genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+), there is a dearth of information on the other related diseases caused by mutations of SCN1A. Objective: The aim of this study is to systematically review the literature associated with SCN1A and other non-DS-related disorders. Methods: We searched PubMed and SCOPUS for all the published cases related to gene mutations of SCN1A until October 20, 2021. The results reported by each study were summarized narratively. Results: The PubMed and SCOPUS search yielded 2,889 items. A total of 453 studies published between 2005 and 2020 met the final inclusion criteria. Overall, 303 studies on DS, 93 on GEFS+, three on Doose syndrome, nine on the epilepsy of infancy with migrating focal seizures (EIMFS), six on the West syndrome, two on the Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS), one on the Rett syndrome, seven on the nonsyndromic epileptic encephalopathy (NEE), 19 on hemiplegia migraine, six on autism spectrum disorder (ASD), two on nonepileptic SCN1A-related sudden deaths, and two on the arthrogryposis multiplex congenital were included. Conclusion: Aside from DS, SCN1A also causes other epileptic encephalopathies, such as GEFS+, Doose syndrome, EIMFS, West syndrome, LGS, Rett syndrome, and NEE. In addition to epilepsy, hemiplegic migraine, ASD, sudden death, and arthrogryposis multiplex congenital can also be caused by mutations of SCN1A.
35002826|a|The ontological status of autism has been a subject of considerable debate and philosophical approaches of it have been recent and sparse. On the one hand, from its conception, autism has been historically heavily located in the fields of psychiatry, psychology and neuroscience, which often assume access to an "objective," neutral and infallible reality that is external to the research process and is based on the autistic person's biology and behavioural characteristics, which can be scientifically observed and studied. On the other, proponents of the neurodiversity movement argue against medicalised and pathologising approaches to autism and toward approaches that consider social constructions of autism and relations of power. The Critical Realist philosophy can help reconcile the two positions. Critical Realism conceptualises objectivity as a statement about an object, rather than a neutral and infallible reality. Consequently, Critical Realism suggests that access to reality can only occur through fallible theories. It also suggests that effective theorising goes beyond appearances and phenomena and may even contradict them, which can help challenge dominant behaviourist approaches on autism. I then explore how the tenets of Critical Realism can help strengthen autistic-led theories of autism, the arguments they make, as well as how they support the importance of community autism knowledge. Finally, I present how Critical Realism's approach to knowledge itself as well as the process of knowledge creation can strengthen autistic theorising, autistic participation in autism research and autistic emancipation. In the last part of the article, I explore how the concepts of Critical Realism apply to autistic sociability. I start with the debate between structure and agency, how Critical Realism reconciles this debate and the implications for autistic emancipation and autism research. I then present Critical Realism's process of critique and explanation, how they connect to human emancipation and how they can lead to impactful change in autism research by requiring clear links from research to practice, enhancing practices with strong theoretical underpinnings and thus aiding the aims of emancipatory autism research.
35002808|a|Background: Adults with autism spectrum disorder face several barriers to accessing evidence-based care, including difficulties in communicating needs, social anxiety or in traveling to a health care unit. In recent years, several forms of internet-based treatments have shown to be effective for a variety of psychiatric conditions. Internet-based treatment alternatives allow convenient and flexible formats, and therefore have the potential to increase access to health care for individuals with autism spectrum disorder. However, knowledge about how internet-based treatment features may suit the needs of individuals with autism is limited. The aim of this study was to explore the participant experiences of an internet-based intervention for adults with autism spectrum disorder. The primary focus of the investigation was on autism-specific needs in relation to the features unique to the online format. Methods: In this qualitative study, semi-structured telephone interviews were conducted with 14 participants who had completed a text-based internet-based intervention for adults with autism spectrum disorder. We used an inductive approach and analyzed the data using qualitative content analysis. Results: Five main categories were identified: (1) implications of the online format, (2) the fixed non-individualized model, (3) therapist interaction, (4) interacting with other participants, and (5) making use of the treatment content. Overall, participants appreciated the availability and that they could work on their treatment independent of time or location. Among those participating in group-based chat-sessions with the other participants, it was considered a generally positive experience. Furthermore, most participants felt safe and relaxed in relation to the therapist and appreciated the text-based format. However, several participants felt that the format and content of the treatment was not sufficiently adapted to their individual life situation. Conclusion: In conclusion, this internet-based treatment constitutes an accessible and energy-saving treatment alternative for adults with autism. Further, integrating group-based components seems feasible in an otherwise individual internet-based treatment for individuals with autism. However, group-based components do require a clear purpose and rationale. Future studies should develop and evaluate treatment adaptations tailored to individual needs.
35002805|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is characterized by persistent deficits in social communication and restricted-repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities. ASD is generally associated with chronic inflammatory states, which are linked to immune system dysfunction and/or hyperactivation. The latter might be considered as one of the factors damaging neuronal cells. Several cell types trigger and sustain such neuroinflammation. In this study, we traced different markers of immune system activation on both cellular (immune cell phenotypes) and mediatory levels (production of cytokines) alongside adverse hematology and biochemistry screening in a group of autistic children. In addition, we analyzed the main metabolic pathways potentially involved in ASD development: energy (citric acid cycle components), porphyrin, and neurotransmitter metabolism. Several ASD etiological factors, like heavy metal intoxication, and risk factors-genetic polymorphisms of the relevant neurotransmitters and vitamin D receptors-were also analyzed. Finally, broad linear regression analysis allowed us to elucidate the possible scenario that led to the development of chronic inflammation in ASD patients. Obtained data showed elevated levels of urinary cis-aconitate, isocitrate, alfa-ketoglutarate, and HMG. There were no changes in levels of metabolites of monoamine neurotransmitters, however, the liver-specific tryptophan kinurenine pathway metabolites showed increased levels of quinolinate (QUIN) and picolinate, whereas the level of kynurenate remained unchanged. Abovementioned data demonstrate the infringement in energy metabolism. We found elevated levels of lead in red blood cells, as well as altered porphyrin metabolism, which support the etiological role of heavy metal intoxication in ASD. Lead intoxication, the effect of which is intensified by a mutation of the VDR-Taq and MAO-A, leads to quinolinic acid increase, resulting in energy metabolism depletion and mitochondrial dysfunction. Moreover, our data backing the CD4+CD3+ T-cell dependence of mitochondrial dysfunction development in ASD patients reported in our previous study leads us to the conclusion that redox-immune cross-talk is considered a main functional cell damaging factor in ASD patients.
35002788|a|Background: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) often co-exists with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), which may aggravate functional impairment. However, it is unclear how comorbid ADHD symptoms influence the adaptive behavior and social interaction deficits of children with ASD. Methods: The study enrolled 340 children (ranging from 2 to 14 years) with ASD, with comorbid ASD and ADHD, or with typical development (TD). A psychological evaluation involving adaptive behavior and social function was conducted using the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale, Second Edition (VABS-II) and the Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS). Results: There was a high prevalence of ADHD symptoms (46.6%) in children with ASD, and children with ASD + ADHD presented the worse profile of ASD symptoms. The ASD + ADHD group had higher scores on VABS and lower scores on SRS in comparison with the ASD alone group and TD group. The regression analysis revealed that ASD symptoms and ADHD symptoms were significantly associated with greater impairments in adaptive behavior and social function. The ADHD symptoms were responsible for an additional 0.8% of the variance in adaptive behavior, and 9.5% of the variance in social function. Conclusions: More severe ASD symptoms and greater impairment in adaptive function and social ability were found in children with ASD and comorbid ADHD, highlighting the need to identify ADHD comorbidities early on in children with ASD and to reduce their negative impact on functioning.
35002650|a|Behavioral differences in responding to tactile and auditory stimuli are widely reported in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, the neural mechanisms underlying distinct tactile and auditory reactivity patterns in ASD remain unclear with theories implicating differences in both perceptual and attentional processes. The current study sought to investigate (1) the neural indices of early perceptual and later attentional factors underlying tactile and auditory processing in children with and without ASD, and (2) the relationship between neural indices of tactile and auditory processing and ASD symptomatology. Participants included 14, 6-12-year-olds with ASD and 14 age- and non-verbal IQ matched typically developing (TD) children. Children participated in an event-related potential (ERP) oddball paradigm during which they watched a silent video while being presented with tactile and auditory stimuli (i.e., 80% standard speech sound/a/; 10% oddball speech sound/i/; 10% novel vibrotactile stimuli on the fingertip with standard speech sound/a/). Children's early and later ERP responses to tactile (P1 and N2) and auditory stimuli (P1, P3a, and P3b) were examined. Non-parametric analyses showed that children with ASD displayed differences in early perceptual processing of auditory (i.e., lower amplitudes at central region of interest), but not tactile, stimuli. Analysis of later attentional components did not show differences in response to tactile and auditory stimuli in the ASD and TD groups. Together, these results suggest that differences in auditory responsivity patterns could be related to perceptual factors in children with ASD. However, despite differences in caregiver-reported sensory measures, children with ASD did not differ in their neural reactivity to infrequent touch-speech stimuli compared to TD children. Nevertheless, correlational analyses confirmed that inter-individual differences in neural responsivity to tactile and auditory stimuli were related to social skills in all children. Finally, we discuss how the paradigm and stimulus type used in the current study may have impacted our results. These findings have implications for everyday life, where individual differences in responding to tactile and auditory stimuli may impact social functioning.
35002608|a|Neuroimaging has revealed numerous atypical functional connectivity of default mode network (DMN) dedicated to social communications (SC) in autism spectrum disorder (ASD), yet their nature and directionality remain unclear. Here, preschoolers with autism received physical intervention from a 12-week mini-basketball training program (12W-MBTP). Therefore, the directionality and nature of regional interactions within the DMN after the intervention are evaluated while assessing the impact of an intervention on SC. Based on the results of independent component analysis (ICA), we applied spectral dynamic causal modeling (DCM) for participants aged 3-6 years (experimental group, N = 17, control group, N = 14) to characterize the longitudinal changes following intervention in intrinsic and extrinsic effective connectivity (EC) between core regions of the DMN. Then, we analyzed the correlation between the changes in EC and SRS-2 scores to establish symptom-based validation. We found that after the 12W-MBTP intervention, the SRS-2 score of preschoolers with ASD in the experimental group was decreased. Concurrently, the inhibitory directional connections were observed between the core regions of the DMN, including increased self-inhibition in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), and the changes of EC in mPFC were significantly correlated with change in the social responsiveness scale-2 (SRS-2) score. These new findings shed light on DMN as a potential intervention target, as the inhibitory information transmission between its core regions may play a positive role in improving SC behavior in preschoolers with ASD, which may be a reliable neuroimaging biomarker for future studies. Clinical Trial Registration: This study registered with the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR1900024973) on August 05, 2019.
35002604|a|The SHANK family of proteins play critical structural and functional roles in the postsynaptic density (PSD) at excitatory glutamatergic synapses. Through their multidomain structure they form a structural platform across the PSD for protein-protein interactions, as well as recruiting protein complexes to strengthen excitatory synaptic transmission. Mutations in SHANKs reflect their importance to synapse development and plasticity. This is evident in autism spectrum disorder (ASD), a neurodevelopmental disorder resulting in behavioural changes including repetitive behaviours, lack of sociability, sensory issues, learning, and language impairments. Human genetic studies have revealed ASD mutations commonly occur in SHANKs. Rodent models expressing these mutations display ASD behavioural impairments, and a subset of these deficits are rescued by reintroduction of Shank in adult animals, suggesting that lack of SHANK during key developmental periods can lead to permanent changes in the brain's wiring. Here we explore the differences in synaptic function and plasticity from development onward in rodent Shank ASD models. To date the most explored brain regions, relate to the behavioural changes observed, e.g., the striatum, hippocampus, sensory, and prefrontal cortex. In addition, less-studied regions including the hypothalamus, cerebellum, and peripheral nervous system are also affected. Synaptic phenotypes include weakened but also strengthened synaptic function, with NMDA receptors commonly affected, as well as changes in the balance of excitation and inhibition especially in cortical brain circuits. The effects of shankopathies in activity-dependent brain wiring is an important target for therapeutic intervention. We therefore highlight areas of research consensus and identify remaining questions and challenges.
35002603|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) represent a complex group of neurodevelopmental disorders that are characterized by impaired social behavior and communication as well as repetitive behavior and restricted interests. Prenatal exposure to high levels of testosterone and preeclampsia are thought to be risk factors of ASD. We had previously reported that overexpression of the mitochondrial cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme (CYP11A1) could lead to both preeclampsia-like symptoms and increased testosterone levels in pregnant rats. In this study, we investigated the association between high CYP11A1 levels in pregnant rats and autism-like behavior in their offspring. Timed-pregnant Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats were injected with CYP11A1 gene-carrying adenoviruses on gestational day 8.5, and their offspring were then compared with those from timed-pregnant control SD rats. Compared with their control counterparts, the offspring of the CYP11A1-ovexpressing dams displayed more symptoms of anxiety and spent less time in social interactions and more time in self-grooming and rearing, all indicators of autism-like behavior. Sequencing of the transcriptome in primary microglia from the offspring of CYP11A1-overexpressing dams revealed that immune pathways were highly activated, and the gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptor genes were among the top differentially expressed genes. Using primary microglia cultures generated from neonatal rats, tumor necrosis factor-alpha expression was found to be elevated in the cells transfected with CYP11A1-carrying adenoviruses. Additionally, the offspring of CYP11A1-overexpressing dams displayed dysregulated GABAA receptor expression. Taken together, these results suggest that abnormal CYP11A1 gene expression in pregnant rats could lead to microglial immune activation and dysregulated GABAA receptor expression in their offspring and thereby anxiety and autism-related behavior. Our study suggests that the pathways regulated by CYP11A1 could be promising preventative and therapeutic targets for ASD.
35002495|a|Introduction: The Malay autism spectrum quotient, children's version (AQ-Child) is a translated and reduced version of the autism spectrum disorder (ASD) screening instrument. The aim of this study was to test the reliability and validity of the translated Malay version of the questionnaire. Methods: The instrument is a 41-item Likert scale form parental questionnaire designed to screen ASD among children aged 6 years old-12 years old. It was filled out by the parents of 700 children (children with ASD = 47; typically developing children = 653) who were contacted through five special education schools and seven mainstream primary schools. Results: Findings showed that Malay AQ-Child has an internal consistency of 0.82 as a whole scale for 41-items. Receiver operator characteristic analysis showed that the cut score of 63 for the translated, reduced version of the AQ-Child with 41 items had 99% area (95% confidence interval [CI]) under receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, and sensitivity and specificity of 93% and 99%, respectively. As for factor structure, principal component analysis (PCA) showed good loading values for most of the items in the instrument. Conclusion: The translated version of the Malay AQ-Child for screening ASD can further facilitate the process of surveillance and early intervention for children who need it.
35001807|a|Illustrations of the internal workings of the brain often depict arrows. In contrast, many illustrations which depict the link between certain brain functions and the outside world harness a graphic technique more usually associated with forms of popular culture such as comics. This technique comprises a balloon containing an image or message linked either by a tail emanating from the mouth when representing speech, or by a stream of bubbles emanating from the head when representing thought. Although a pictorial speech device first appeared over two millennia ago, balloons with their linkages now have various important practical clinical applications, notably in autism spectrum disorders, profound deafness in children without neurocognitive impairment, and sexual health education.
35001294|a|The purpose of the study was to examine the effects of an instructional sequence involving simple tact, category tact, and match-to-sample instructions on the emergence of metaphorical extensions about emotions for children with autism spectrum disorder. Three Chinese children (1 girl, 2 boys, 7-8 years old) with autism spectrum disorder participated. Results indicate that the participants' intraverbal responses for metaphorical extensions about emotions emerged or increased without direct training after completion of the instructional sequence to which verbal instruction had been added. All three children maintained the metaphorical extensions about emotions for 4 weeks.
35000620|a|BACKGROUND: Long-term consequences of comorbid autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in individuals with anorexia nervosa (AN) are inadequately investigated. METHODS: In the 1980s, 51 adolescent-onset AN cases (AN group) and 51 matched controls (COMP group) were recruited from the community. They have been examined on five occasions. The four last assessments included the Morgan-Russell Outcome Assessment Schedule (MROAS) to assess eating disorder outcomes (weight, dieting, menstruation), and related problems including psychiatric, psychosexual and socioeconomic state. In the present study, at age 44, when 30 years had elapsed, MROAS data were compared with previous results. At age 16, 21, 24 and 32 years, all individuals had been assessed regarding ASD. At the 30-year follow-up, the impact of the ASD on the MROAS data was analysed. RESULTS: In the AN group, all core anorectic symptoms (weight, dieting, menstruation) were on a par with the COMP group at the 30-year follow-up, but the positive outcomes were limited to those who had never had an ASD diagnosis. Psychiatric state was significantly worse in the AN group, particularly in the subgroup who had an ASD diagnosis assigned. The AN group-again particularly those with ASD-had a more negative attitude to sexual matters than the COMP group. The AN group had worse outcomes than the COMP group for 'personal contacts', 'social contacts,' and 'employment record' at the 30-year follow-up and the outcomes were worse the more often an ASD diagnosis had been assigned. LIMITATIONS: Rare data collection points throughout 30 years (only 5 assessments). ASD was assessed in the first four studies but was not assessed again at the 30-year follow-up. CONCLUSIONS: Mental health, psychosexual, and socioeconomic status were compromised up to 30 years after AN onset. Coexisting ASD contributed to the poor outcome. Core anorectic symptoms had "normalised" three decades after AN onset. Some individuals with anorexia nervosa (AN) also suffer from autism. In this study we have investigated outcome of AN 30 years after the onset of AN and whether the presence of autism affects the outcome. Since the 1980s we have followed 51 individuals with teenage-onset AN and 51 healthy controls. They have been examined on five occasions, and an instrument that measures symptoms of AN (weight, dieting, body image), psychiatric symptoms, ability to work, and relationships with partner, family, and friends has been used to assess outcome. Autism was assessed in the first four studies. Symptoms of AN had normalised at 30-year follow-up, but only among those without autism. Psychiatric symptoms, ability to work, and relationships were issues that persisted after 30 years in the AN group, and those who had both autism and a history of AN had even more pronounced problems in these areas. The AN group had a more negative attitude to sexual matters than the control group, the outcome was worse the more often an autism diagnosis had been assigned. CONCLUSIONS: Mental health, psychosexual, and socioeconomic status are affected up to 30 years after AN onset, particularly among those with autism.
35000419|a|
35000417|a|LAY ABSTRACT: The Healthy Relationships on the Autism Spectrum class is unique because autistic people helped to develop it and co-taught it. It is an online, six-session class. The class was piloted in 2020-2021 with 55 autistic people who were ages 18-44 years old. This feasibility study found that most people who took the class liked it. Surveys filled out by the students before and after the class showed that they became less sensitive to rejection, used more positive thinking skills, and were more interested in being social. However, the class may not have made them feel less lonely. The team that invented the class is using the feedback to improve it. The class holds promise for improving the quality of friendships and dating relationships for autistic adults and should be tested further.
35000177|a|Over the last few decades, the global prevalence of neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative illnesses has risen rapidly. Although the aetiology remains unclear, evidence is mounting that exposure to persistent hydrocarbon pollutants is a substantial risk factor, predisposing a person to neurological diseases later in life. Epidemiological studies correlate environmental hydrocarbon exposure to brain disorders including neuropathies, cognitive, motor and sensory impairments; neurodevelopmental disorders like autism spectrum disorder (ASD); and neurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). Particulate matter, benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylenes, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and endocrine-disrupting chemicals have all been linked to neurodevelopmental problems in all class of people. There is mounting evidence that supports the prevalence of petroleum hydrocarbon becoming neurotoxic and being involved in the pathogenesis of AD and PD. More study is needed to fully comprehend the scope of these problems in the context of unconventional oil and natural gas. This review summarises in vitro, animal and epidemiological research on the genesis of neurodegenerative disorders, highlighting evidence that supports inexorable role of hazardous hydrocarbon exposure in the pathophysiology of AD and PD. In this review, we offer a summary of the existing evidence gathered through a Medline literature search of systematic reviews and meta-analyses of the most important epidemiological studies published so far.
34999873|a|BACKGROUND: The association patterns of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) with educational attainment (EA) are complex; children with ADHD and ASD are at risk of poor academic outcomes, and parental EA has been associated with risk of ADHD/ASD in the offspring. Little is known on the causal links between ADHD, ASD, EA and the potential contribution of cognitive ability. METHODS: Using the latest genome-wide association studies (GWAS) summary data on ADHD, ASD and EA, we applied two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) to assess the effects of genetic liability to ADHD and ASD on EA. Reverse direction analyses were additionally performed. Multivariable MR was performed to estimate any effects independent of cognitive ability. RESULTS: Genetic liability to ADHD had a negative effect on EA, independently of cognitive ability (MVMRIVW: -1.7 months of education per doubling of genetic liability to ADHD; 95% CI: -2.8 to -0.7), whereas genetic liability to ASD a positive effect (MVMRIVW: 30 days per doubling of the genetic liability to ASD; 95% CI: 2 to 53). Reverse direction analyses suggested that genetic liability to higher EA had an effect on lower risk of ADHD, independently of cognitive ability (MVMRIVWOR: 0.33 per SD increase; 95% CI: 0.26 to 0.43) and increased risk of ASD (MRIVWOR: 1.51 per SD increase; 95% CI: 1.29 to 1.77), which was partly explained by cognitive ability (MVMRIVWOR per SD increase: 1.24; 95%CI: 0.96 to 1.60). CONCLUSIONS: Genetic liability to ADHD and ASD is likely to affect educational attainment, independently of underlying cognitive ability.
34998618|a|Advances in genetic technologies have facilitated the development of new animal models of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), enabling cross-species validation of disease-related phenotypes and exploration of species-specific behaviours. In a recent study, Berg et al. used a rat model of Angelman Syndrome (AS) to identify Ube3a-dependent social behaviours, highlighting potential cross-species convergence and divergence between rodent models.
34998116|a|BACKGROUND: There is a lack of autism screening instruments for deaf or hard of hearing (DHH) adults with intellectual disability. AIMS: This study examined the diagnostic validity of the Pervasive Developmental Disorder in Mental Retardation Scale and the Diagnostic Behavioral Assessment for autism spectrum disorder - Revised in this rare population. METHODS AND PARTICIPANTS: 56 DHH adults with intellectual disability living in three specialized therapeutic communities were examined, 9 of whom met criteria for autism. OUTCOMES AND RESULTS: With minimal adaptions regarding item interpretation, both tools showed good diagnostic and high convergent validity. Items probing for difficulties in reciprocal social interaction and restricted interests were discriminant between individuals with and without autism. CONCLUSION: These data suggest that both autism screening tools are feasible and psychometrically sound when used with appropriate adaptations for DHH adults with intellectual disability.
34998084|a|Gaze patterns during face perception have been shown to relate to psychiatric symptoms. Standard analysis of gaze behavior includes calculating fixations within arbitrarily predetermined areas of interest. In contrast to this approach, we present an objective, data-driven method for the analysis of gaze patterns and their relation to diagnostic test scores. This method was applied to data acquired in an adult sample (N = 111) of psychiatry outpatients while they freely looked at images of human faces. Dimensional symptom scores of autism, attention deficit, and depression were collected. A linear regression model based on Principal Component Analysis coefficients computed for each participant was used to model symptom scores. We found that specific components of gaze patterns predicted autistic traits as well as depression symptoms. Gaze patterns shifted away from the eyes with increasing autism traits, a well-known effect. Additionally, the model revealed a lateralization component, with a reduction of the left visual field bias increasing with both autistic traits and depression symptoms independently. Taken together, our model provides a data-driven alternative for gaze data analysis, which can be applied to dimensionally-, rather than categorically-defined clinical subgroups within a variety of contexts. Methodological and clinical contribution of this approach are discussed.
34997988|a|Autism is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder leading to deficits in social interaction, communication, and several activities. An increasing number of evidence suggests a role of oxidative stress in the etiology of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Indeed, impaired antioxidant mechanisms may lead to the inadequate removal of H2 O2 with a consequent increase in highly active hydroxyl radicals and other reactive oxygen species causing cellular damages. The GPx1 is one of the most important enzymes counteracting oxidative stress. In this work, we investigated a possible correlation between the GCG repeat polymorphism present in the first exon of GPx1 gene encoding a tract of five to seven alanine residues (ALA5, ALA6, and ALA7) and ASD. Our findings highlighted a high frequency of ALA5 allele in ASD subjects. Moreover, proteins corresponding to the three GPx1 variants were produced in vitro, and the evaluation of their activity showed a lower values for GPx1 having ALA5 polymorphism. The comparison of the secondary and tertiary structure predictions revealed an alpha-helix in correspondence of alanine stretch only in the case of GPx1-ALA7 variant. Finally, to better investigate protein structure, steady-state fluorescence measurements of GPx1 intrinsic tryptophan were carried out and the three tested proteins exhibited a different stability under denaturing conditions. This work demonstrates the importance in adopting a multidisciplinary strategy to comprehend the role of GPx1 in ASD.
34997882|a|We evaluated the success of a best practice alert (BPA) in recruiting underrepresented families into an autism spectrum disorder research cohort by comparing BPA-response outcomes (Interested, Declined, Enrolled, Dismissed) in pediatric primary care practices (TCPs) serving diverse communities with those of subspecialty clinics. Compared to subspecialty clinics, TCPs had higher proportions of Interested responses for patients with private insurance (60.9% vs. 46.2%), Dismissed responses for patients with public insurance (30.1% vs. 20.0%), and Interested responses for non-white patients (47.7% vs. 33.3%). A targeted BPA can help researchers access more diverse groups and improve equitable representation. However, select groups more often had their alert dismissed, suggesting possible selection bias among some pediatricians regarding who should receive information about study opportunities.
34997881|a|There is a growing trend of adult diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Research has found that diagnosis can prompt a process of sense-making which may be disrupted by lack of post-diagnostic support. Given the continued involvement of many parents in supporting their adult son or daughter with ASD, it is vital to understand their experiences to meet their needs in adapting to the diagnosis. Eleven parents of recently diagnosed adults participated in semi-structured interviews which were analysed thematically. Findings demonstrate that the new knowledge of diagnosis facilitates changes in attributions, interactions and relationships, but can result in unmet emotional and relational support needs. Findings are relevant to those involved in adult diagnosis, and the provision of post-diagnostic support.
34997804|a|BACKGROUND: Evidence shows that the relation with the referent (object manipulation, contact/no contact pointing) and the different hand features (index finger/open palm) when pointing indicate different levels of cognitive and linguistic attainment in typical development (TD). This evidences the close link between pointing, cognition and language in TD, but this relation is understudied in autism. Moreover, the longitudinal pathway these abilities follow remains unexplored and it is unclear what specific role (predictor or mediator) pointing and cognition have in both typical and atypical language development. AIMS: The first aim was to investigate whether pointing hand features (index finger/open palm) and relation with the referent (manipulation, contact and no contact pointing) similarly predict language in children with and without autism. The second aim was to explore whether cognition mediates the longitudinal relationship between pointing and language development. METHODS & PROCEDURES: Sixteen children with autism, 13 children at high risk (HR) for autism and 18 TD children participated in an interactive gesture-elicitation task and were tested on standardised cognitive and expressive language batteries in a longitudinal design. A two-step analysis consisted of a stepwise linear regression and mediation analyses. First, the linear regression identified which hand features and types of relation with the referent predicted expressive language in all groups. Second, three mediation analyses (one per group) assessed the predictor/mediator role of the variables that met significance in the regression analysis. OUTCOMES & RESULTS: Both cognition and index finger pointing were direct longitudinal predictors of further expressive language skills in the autism group. In TD and HR groups this relation was mediated by age. CONCLUSIONS & IMPLICATIONS: Findings highlight the role of age in communicative development, but suggest a key role of cognition and index finger use in the longitudinal relationship between pointing gestures and expressive language development in children with autism. This has important clinical implications and supports the view that index finger pointing production might be a useful tool in the intervention for communicative and language abilities in autism. WHAT THIS PAPER ADDS: What is already known on the subject There is evidence that no contact pointing is associated with complex socio-cognitive abilities that underpin communication in TD. Similarly, studies in TD show that index finger pointing is closely linked with language acquisition. However, it is unclear whether these associations are present in autism. In addition, the mediating (or predictive) role of cognition in the pointing-language relation has not yet been explored neither in typical nor in atypical development. What this paper adds to existing knowledge This paper shows that index finger pointing and cognition are direct longitudinal predictors of expressive language in the autism group. In the other groups this relation is mediated by age. This suggests that there is a window of opportunity for pointing to predict expressive language whereas the predictive value of cognition expands in development. Based on this, children with autism would share the same language predictors as TD children, but with delays. What are the potential or actual clinical implications of this work? This study reveals that index finger, age and cognition reliably predict spoken language in autism, which may indicate that early prelinguistic intervention based on pointing production and the improvement of cognitive skills might have a positive impact on spoken language in this population.
34997736|a|Aripiprazole, cariprazine and brexpiprazole are antipsychotic drugs (APD) whose action is associated with partial agonism at the dopamine D2/D3 receptors. They are increasingly more widely used in clinical practice, also off-label. The aim of this article is to present the current state of knowledge on the use of these drugs in the treatment of mental disorders. The position statement was developed by the panel of experts appointedby the Executive Board of the Polish Psychiatric Association, consisting of individuals with many years of experience in treating patients with mental disorders. The evaluation included the analysis of literature databases (Medline, Embase, Cochrane) and information obtained from metaanalyses and summaries of product characteristics. A key property of D2/D3 partial agonists is that they display diverse effects on dopamine pathways: (a) blockade of mesolimbic signalling that is overactive in the acute phase of schizophrenia and mania, (b) stimulation of mesocortical pathways with an improvement (or at least with no deterioration) of cognitive functions and negative symptoms, (c) no blockade of the tuberoinfundibular pathway and, consequently, low risk of increased prolactin secretion, (d) no blockade of nigrostriatal pathway and, consequently, low risk of extrapyramidal symptoms. Selective profile of action and intrinsic activity at dopamine D2 (aripiprazole > brexpiprazole) and D3 (cariprazine) receptors in combination with the lack of antihistamine and anticholinergic properties make aripiprazole, brexpiprazole and cariprazine different form other APD in terms of their safety and tolerability. This is the reason for the increasing use of these drugs in the treatment of schizophrenia and mood disorders, and in the case of aripiprazole also in obsessive-compulsive, autism-spectrum and tic disorders.
34997732|a|Creativity, art and artistic creation in music, dance and visual arts are brain activities specific to humans. Their genetic background remained unexplored for years, but many recent studies have uncovered significant associations with cognition-related genes and loci. These studies are summarized in the present article. Creativity is a trait with heavy genetic influences, which are also associated with mental disorders and altruism. Associated genes include dopaminergic, serotoninergic and other genes (a1-antitrypsin, neuregulin, Brain-derived neurotrophic factor). Music is another complex phenotype with important genetic background. Studies in musicians and their families have highlighted the contribution of loci (e.g., 4q22) and specific genes (vasopressin receptor 1alpha and serotonin transporter). The latter two are also associated with dancing. Although few studies have investigated visual arts, they appear to be influenced by genetic differences, which could explain the increased prevalence of synesthesia in artists and individuals with autism. Lastly, although genes play an important role in creativity and art, epigenetics and the environment should not be overlooked. The genetic exploration of artistic creativity may provide useful knowledge on cognition, behavior and brain function. It may also enable targeted and personalized art therapy in health and disease.
34997728|a|Pathological changes in synapse formation, plasticity, and development are caused by altered trafficking and assembly of postsynaptic scaffolding proteins at sites of glutamatergic and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic synapses, suggesting their involvement in the etiology of neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism. Several autism-related mouse models have been developed in recent years for studying molecular, cellular, and behavioural defects in order to understand the etiology of autism and test the potential treatment strategies. In this review, we explain the role of alterations in selected postsynaptic scaffolding proteins in relevant transgene autism-like mouse models. We also provide a summary of selected animal models by paying special attention to interactions between guanylate kinases or membrane-associated guanylate kinases (MAGUKs), as well as other synapse protein components which form functional synaptic networks. The study of early developmental stages of autism-relevant animal models can help us understand the origin and development of diverse autistic symptomatology.
34997552|a|PURPOSE: This research explored whether orthorexia nervosa is associated with deficits in executive function. METHODS: A non-clinical sample of participants (n = 405; 80% women, 53% white, mean age = 24, mean body mass index = 25) completed the Orthorexia Nervosa Inventory (ONI) and the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function-Adult version (BRIEF-A). RESULTS: ONI scores were weakly to moderately correlated with all BRIEF-A scales (p < 0.001 for eight scales, p < 0.05 for one scale), exhibiting the greatest correlations with the scales assessing behavioral regulation: Emotional Control (r = 0.34), Inhibition (r = 0.30), Set Shifting (r = 0.25), and Self-Monitoring (r = 0.28). Hierarchical regression analyses revealed that eight of these nine relationships remained significant (p < 0.001 for five scales including all behavioral regulation scales, p < 0.01 for two scales, p < 0.05 for one scale) after controlling for demographic variables (e.g., gender, body mass index, age, education level) and diagnoses of an eating disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism, and learning disability. CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that, despite unique manifestations, orthorexia and anorexia may possess an overlapping neuropsychological profile marked by deficits in executive function, which may negatively impact daily life. LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level V, descriptive cross-sectional study.
34997429|a|
34997368|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is increasingly prevalent, intervention costs are high, and long-term outcomes are poor. Proactive implementation of evidence-based practices (EBPs; Steinbrenner et al., Evidence-Based Practices for Children, Youth, and Young Adults with Autism, 2020) through an assessment or planning process can lead to more effective services (Rubin et al., Admin Policy Mental Health Mental Health Serv Res 43(6), 1023-1028, 2016). The objective of this study is (a) to identify factors associated with the use of proactive versus reactive strategies for school-based services for students with ASD and (b) to examine school personnel perceptions of the use of proactive versus reactive strategies. Data were from a larger project in which 6 semi-structured focus groups were conducted to understand school personnel perceptions of how school districts implement new programs for ASD. Transcripts were coded using an iterative coding and review process. In the present study, primary themes were identified and classified as proactive or reactive. Participants reported both proactive and reactive allocation of district resources for intervention implementation. Reactive implementation was associated with litigation or due process, escalated student behavior, and non-public school placement, whereas proactive implementation was associated with ASD-specific programming, grants, personnel experience with EBPs, and prospective needs assessment. Participants perceived the reactive strategies as disadvantageous, and yet these strategies were sometimes still employed. Understanding the role of proactive and reactive strategies and the factors that influence their use could enable more effective planning for EBP use to improve both cost savings and student outcomes. This study is an important first step to explore resource allocation for school-based services for students with ASD.
34997196|a|The ongoing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) accelerates the discovery of prophylactic and therapeutic drugs for persons infected with the virus. Drug repurposing for the COVID-19 pandemic has received particular attention. Increasing clinical data suggest that antidepressant use in early-stage subjects with COVID-19 might be associated with a reduced risk of intubation or death. Among the antidepressants, fluvoxamine is the most attractive drug for mild to moderate subjects with COVID-19. In this article, we review the mechanisms of action (i.e., serotonin transporter, sigma-1 receptor, and acid sphingomyelinase) of fluvoxamine for COVID-19. Furthermore, we discuss a possible link between maternal COVID-19 infection and a risk for neuropsychiatric disorders (i.e., autism spectrum disorder and schizophrenia) in offspring.
34997195|a|Mental disorders present a global health concern, while the diagnosis of mental disorders can be challenging. The diagnosis is even harder for patients who have more than one type of mental disorder, especially for young toddlers who are not able to complete questionnaires or standardized rating scales for diagnosis. In the past decade, multiple genomic association signals have been reported for mental disorders, some of which present attractive drug targets. Concurrently, machine learning algorithms, especially deep learning algorithms, have been successful in the diagnosis and/or labeling of complex diseases, such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or cancer. In this study, we focused on eight common mental disorders, including ADHD, depression, anxiety, autism, intellectual disabilities, speech/language disorder, delays in developments, and oppositional defiant disorder in the ethnic minority of African Americans. Blood-derived whole genome sequencing data from 4179 individuals were generated, including 1384 patients with the diagnosis of at least one mental disorder. The burden of genomic variants in coding/non-coding regions was applied as feature vectors in the deep learning algorithm. Our model showed ~65% accuracy in differentiating patients from controls. Ability to label patients with multiple disorders was similarly successful, with a hamming loss score less than 0.3, while exact diagnostic matches are around 10%. Genes in genomic regions with the highest weights showed enrichment of biological pathways involved in immune responses, antigen/nucleic acid binding, chemokine signaling pathway, and G-protein receptor activities. A noticeable fact is that variants in non-coding regions (e.g., ncRNA, intronic, and intergenic) performed equally well as variants in coding regions; however, unlike coding region variants, variants in non-coding regions do not express genomic hotspots whereas they carry much more narrow standard deviations, indicating they probably serve as alternative markers.
34996793|a|INTRODUCTION: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD), including cerebral palsy (CP), autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and foetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD), are characterised by impaired development of the early central nervous system, impacting cognitive and/or physical function. Early detection of NDD enables infants to be fast-tracked to early intervention services, optimising outcomes. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander infants may experience early life factors increasing their risk of neurodevelopmental vulnerability, which persist into later childhood, further compounding the health inequities experienced by First Nations peoples in Australia. The LEAP-CP prospective cohort study will investigate the efficacy of early screening programmes, implemented in Queensland, Australia to earlier identify Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander infants who are 'at risk' of adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes (NDO) or NDD. Diagnostic accuracy and feasibility of early detection tools for identifying infants 'at risk' of a later diagnosis of adverse NDO or NDD will be determined. METHODS AND ANALYSIS: Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander infants born in Queensland, Australia (birth years 2020-2022) will be invited to participate. Infants aged <9 months corrected age (CA) will undergo screening using the (1) General Movements Assessment (GMA); (2) Hammersmith Infant Neurological Examination (HINE); (3) Rapid Neurodevelopmental Assessment (RNDA) and (4) Ages and Stages Questionnaire-Aboriginal adaptation (ASQ-TRAK). Developmental outcomes at 12 months CA will be determined for: (1) neurological (HINE); (2) motor (Peabody Developmental Motor Scales 2); (3) cognitive and communication (Bayley Scales of Infant Development III); (4) functional capabilities (Paediatric Evaluation of Disability Inventory-Computer Adaptive Test) and (5) behaviour (Infant Toddler Social and Emotional Assessment). Infants will be classified as typically developing or 'at risk' of an adverse NDO and/or specific NDD based on symptomology using developmental and diagnostic outcomes for (1) CP (2) ASD and (3) FASD. The effects of perinatal, social and environmental factors, caregiver mental health and clinical neuroimaging on NDOs will be investigated. ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Ethics approval has been granted by appropriate Queensland ethics committees; Far North Queensland Health Research Ethics Committee (HREC/2019/QCH/50533 (Sep ver 2)-1370), the Townsville HHS Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC/QTHS/56008), the University of Queensland Medical Research Ethics Committee (2020000185/HREC/2019/QCH/50533) and the Children's Health Queensland HHS Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC/20/QCHQ/63906) with governance and support from local First Nations communities. Findings from this study will be disseminated via peer-reviewed publications and conference presentations. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ACTRN12619000969167.
34996473|a|BACKGROUND: Motor impairment is widely acknowledged as a core feature in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), which can affect adaptive behavior and increase severity of symptoms. Low-cost motion capture and virtual reality (VR) game technologies hold a great deal of promise for providing personalized approaches to motor intervention in ASD. The present study explored the feasibility, acceptability and potential efficacy of a custom-designed VR game-based intervention (GaitWayXR ) for improving gross motor skills in youth with ASD. METHODS: Ten children and adolescents (10-17 years) completed six, 20-min VR-based motor training sessions over 2 weeks while whole-body movement was tracked with a low-cost motion capture system. We developed a methodology for using motion tracking data to quantify whole-body movement in terms of efficiency, synchrony and symmetry. We then studied the relationships of the above quantities with standardized measures of motor skill and cognitive flexibility. RESULTS: Our results supported our presumption that the VR intervention is safe, with no adverse events and very few minor to moderate side-effects, while a large proportion of parents said they would use the VR game at home, the most prohibitive reasons for adopting the system for home therapy were cost and space. Although there was little evidence of any benefits of the GaitWayXR  intervention in improving gross motor skills, we showed several positive correlations between the standardized measures of gross motor skills in ASD and our measures of efficiency, symmetry and synchrony from low-cost motion capture. CONCLUSIONS: These findings, though preliminary and limited by small sample size, suggest that low-cost motion capture of children with ASD is feasible with movement exercises in a VR-based game environment. Based on these preliminary findings, we recommend conducting larger-scale studies with methods for improving adherence to VR gaming interventions over longer periods.
34996308|a|OBJECTIVE: ADHD and ODD are commonly co-occurring, but often studied individually. This study evaluated common trajectories of these disorders and explored how they co-develop in early childhood. METHOD: Community parents (N = 273) completed online surveys about their 2-year-old. Children's inattention, hyperactivity/impulsivity, and oppositional defiant disorder symptoms over 2 years were examined using latent class, dual trajectory, and cross-lagged analyses. RESULTS: Most children followed low symptom trajectories. A small portion showed high, moderate, or increasing trajectories. The hyperactive/impulsive domain of ADHD showed a declining symptoms group. Children in high ODD groups were likely to be in high ADHD symptom groups; the converse was true but probabilities were lower. Hyperactive/impulsive symptoms predicted ODD symptoms across time, more than vice versa. CONCLUSION: The study extends the small body of literature assessing early development of ADHD and ODD. Findings suggest that earlier intervention for symptoms of ADHD may mitigate risk of developing ODD.
34996019|a|BACKGROUND: Among all of the studied potential causes of autism, vaccines have received some of the most scrutiny and have been the topic of many evidence-based studies. These efforts have led the great majority of scientists, physicians, and public health researchers to refute causation between vaccines and autism. RATIONALE: This presumed association and concern has been a major contributor to parents' refusal to immunize their children and has become a major threat to public health in secluded populations over the last two decades, even prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. With the emergence of COVID-19 immunizations, sentiments towards this topic were addressed as a public health concern that may influence the ability to overcome the Corona virus worldwide. SCIENTIFIC REVIEW OF DATA: Despite the overwhelming data demonstrating that there is no link between vaccines and autism, many parents are hesitant to immunize their children because of the alleged association. Other contributing factors to the myths and conspiracy theories surrounding the association between vaccines and autism include the fact that the diagnosis of autism is typically made after the age of receiving the main childhood immunizations, as well as the occasional occurrence of regression after the age of first year vaccinations. In spite of vast evidence that the main contribution to the increase in incidence is from improvement of the diagnostic process, this rapid and publicized rise in autism diagnoses feeds parental concerns regarding any medical intervention that may be associated with the health of their children. RECOMMENDATIONS: It is plausible that with more evidence-based studies linking autism to specific etiologies the myth will diminish and disappear eventually. In an era where conspiracy theories are prevalent on social media, it is critical that evidence-based studies relating autism to specific etiologies be made public, and that information concerning autism diagnosis and causes be made more readily available through social media and parental organizations.
34995844|a|The features of 16p11.2 deletion phenotype is developmental delay, intellectual disability, and autism spectrum disorder. Seizures are observed in approximately 20% of individuals with the microdeletion. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) were generated from erythroblasts obtained from a child diagnosed with benign familial infantile epilepsy, caused by 16p11.2 deletion. These iPSCs exhibited stable amplification, expressed pluripotent markers, and differentiated spontaneously into three germ layers in vitro.
34995830|a|The aim is to assess whether instruments developed to measure subjective cognitive complaints (SCCs) and in neurology and aging can reliably be used in ADHD and other common psychiatric classifications. MEDLINE, PsycINFO, CINAHL and EMBASE+EMBASE CLASSIC were searched for relevant work on SCCs in psychiatric classifications (ADHD, autism, mood disorders, schizophrenia) in two phases: 1 identify instruments, 2 relevant studies. 35 studies with varying study quality were included. SCCs are most commonly studied in ADHD and mood disorders, but are found in all psychiatric classifications. SCCs show inconsistent and low associations to objective cognition across disorders, but higher and consistent relations are found with behavioral outcomes. SCCs are not qualitatively different for ADHD compared to other psychiatric classifications, and should thus not be seen as analogous to well validated measures of objective cognition. However, SCCs do reflect suffering, behavioral difficulties and problems experienced by across those with psychiatric problems in daily life.
34994928|a|Autism is a prevalent neurodevelopmental condition, highly heterogenous in both genotype and phenotype. This communication adds to existing discussion of the heterogeneity of clinical sequencing tests, "gene panels", marketed for application in autism. We evaluate the clinical utility of available gene panels based on existing genetic evidence. We determine that diagnostic yields of these gene panels range from 0.22% to 10.02% and gene selection for the panels is variable in relevance, here measured as percentage overlap with SFARI Gene and ranging from 15.15% to 100%. We conclude that gene panels marketed for use in autism are currently of limited clinical utility, and that sequencing with greater coverage may be more appropriate.
34994927|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has a significant impact on the quality of life (QoL) of families. This study aimed to examine, for parents of children with ASD, the dyadic effect of each parent's coping strategy on the perception of the impact of ASD on their QoL. In total, 164 couples completed self-report questionnaires, including the Par-DD-QoL, to evaluate the parental perception of QoL. Results from the actor-partner interdependence model showed that, in addition to the effect of the mothers' and fathers' emotion-focused coping on their own perception of QoL, the mothers' emotion-focused coping plays a key role in the fathers' perception of QoL. These findings suggest that both parents of children with ASD would benefit from couple-focused interventions.
34994926|a|Visual, as compared to verbal, tasks are often assumed to be easier for individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), but is this true for story comprehension? This study evaluated story comprehension monitoring across visual, listening, and written modalities and assessed predictors in two closely matched groups (age, socioeconomic status, language, nonverbal cognition, and word reading) of children and adolescents (8-14 years) with ASD (n = 20) and typical development (typically developing [TD]; n = 20). The results of mixed-effects models indicated that story comprehension monitoring was low overall, and performance was comparable across visual, listening, and written modalities for participants with ASD. Age, vocabulary, nonverbal working memory, response and distractor inhibition, and social communication significantly predicted comprehension monitoring.
34994738|a|Theory of mind (ToM) is a complex cognitive mechanism which refers to our ability to understand that other people have beliefs, plans, desires, hopes, intentions, and knowledge that may differ from our own mental and emotional states. Theory of mind is critical for social and interpersonal functioning and allows people to make sense of other's behavior. Theinitial aim of theory of mind research was to record normative development in preschool age children. Almost 30 years ago, when researchers discovered that theory of mind is altered in individuals with autism spectrum disorder, they also explored impairments in ToM in different clinical disorders. Research results indicate the presence of ToM deficits in childhood mental and neurodevelopmental disorders, such as: autism spectrum disorders, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, Gilles de la Tourette Syndrome, fetus alcohol syndrome, mood disorders, eating disorders, or obsessive-compulsive disorder. This article reviews significant studies of theory of mind impairments in individual childhood disorders and selected mental disorders.
34994737|a|This article provides an assessment of the problem of diagnostic errors in autism spectrum disorder. The fact that awareness of autism is on the increase has led to the emergence of a growing number of specialists, as well as other people professionally involved in education and the care of children, who have been noticing features of autistic disorders in ever-younger children. On the one hand, this is certainly beneficial in that the level of knowledge about the symptoms of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is conducive to the identification of children's difficulties; on the other, however, there are concerns that the knowledge possessed by many of those who come into contact with children is often insufficient to diagnose this subtle and changing spectrum of disorders. Neurodevelopmental disorders are especially difficult to assess in small children due to the overlapping symptoms of various disorders. Additionally, periods of intensive development or regression also overlap. Children aged two or three are still too young to exhibit some of the behaviors specific to ASD, and the assessment of speech development and its understanding may be deceptive. The diagnosis of "under observation for possible autism" is often exaggerated. The article presents case studies concerning diagnostic errors in autism spectrum disorder, their consequences and vital conclusions.
34994494|a|BACKGROUND: Individuals with Down syndrome (DS) are at significant risk for early onset Alzheimer's disease (AD), likely due to the triplication of genes on chromosome 21 that facilitate AD neuropathology. To aid the effective early diagnosis of dementia in DS, we demonstrate the strategy of using single point assessment of cognitive performance with scoring normed for degree of intellectual disability to generate age related prevalence data for acquired mild cognitive impairment (AMCI). METHODS: Four hundred and twelve adults with DS were assessed using the Neuropsychological Assessment of dementia in adults with Intellectual Disability. Normative data, banded by degree of intellectual disability, allowed identification of AMCI by atypical deviation from expected performance. RESULTS: AMCI was evident in approximately 20% of adults with DS aged 40 and under, 40% aged 41-50 and 45% aged 51 and over. Relative risk increased significantly in those aged 46 and over. Analysis of prevalence by 5-year age bands revealed two peaks for higher prevalence of AMCI. CONCLUSIONS: Psychometric data indicate single point assessment of AMCI is possible for the majority of adults with DS. Two peaks for age-related prevalence of AMCI suggest the risk for onset of AD conferred by trisomy of chromosome 21 is moderated by another factor, possibly ApoE status.
34994472|a|OBJECTIVES: Research with younger adults has begun to explore associations between autism/autistic traits and vulnerability to Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). Large scale studies and/or examination of age-effects have not been conducted. METHODS: Adults aged 50 years+ from the PROTECT study (n = 20,220) completed items about current and childhood socio-communicative difficulties characteristic of autism. Approximately 1% (n = 251) endorsed high autistic traits, henceforth the Autism Spectrum Traits (AST) group. Differences between the AST and an age-and sex-matched "Comparison Older Adults" (COA; n = 9179) group were explored for lifetime traumatic experiences and current symptoms of PTSD, depression, and anxiety. RESULTS: Almost 30% of the AST group, compared to less than 8% of the COA, reported severe trauma in childhood/adulthood, including emotional, physical or sexual abuse. Elevated current PTSD symptoms were reported by AST compared to COA. An interaction was observed between autistic traits and trauma severity; the effect of level of trauma on PTSD symptoms was significantly greater for AST versus COA participants. This interaction remained significant when controlling for current depression and anxiety symptoms. CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that high autistic traits may increase the likelihood of experiencing trauma across the lifespan, and the impact of severe trauma on PTSD symptoms. Older adults with high (vs. low) autistic traits may be at greater risk of experiencing PTSD symptoms in latter life. Future research should test whether the pattern of results is similar for diagnosed autistic adults.
34994413|a|
34994172|a|BACKGROUND: Alterations in the microbiota-gut-brain axis are associated with the onset of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Numerous studies have reported that the gut microbiota (GM) is significantly altered in individuals with ASD and animal models of ASD. However, few studies have focused on sex-specific differences in the GM and fecal metabolites of ASD. METHODS: In this study, we performed 16S rRNA gene sequencing and untargeted metabolomics in parallel on fecal samples from a valproic acid (VPA)-induced rat model of autism (VPA rats). Based on these data, we analyzed differentially abundant metabolites in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database to reveal the possible mechanism of ASD. Data derived from male and female rats were analyzed separately. Finally, we analyzed the correlation between characteristic genera and characteristic fecal metabolites in VPA rats of both sexes. RESULTS: The results showed that VPA rats of both sexes presented remarkable alterations in the GM and fecal metabolites. Sex-specific differences were noticeably detected. We identified 51 annotated differentially abundant fecal metabolites and 1 differentially enriched KEGG pathway between the male VPA and male control groups. Ruminococcus_2, Candidatus_Soleaferrea, Desulfovibrio, Candidatus_Saccharimonas, Intestinimonas, [Eubacterium]_xylanophilum_group, [Eubacterium]_brachy_group and [Bacteroides]_pectinophilus_group were the characteristic genera of male VPA rats. Between the female VPA and female control groups, 124 annotated differentially abundant fecal metabolites were identified without differentially enriched KEGG pathways. Ruminiclostridium, Acetatifactor, Desulfovibrio, [Eubacterium]_xylanophilum_group and Candidatus_Saccharimonas were the characteristic genera of female VPA rats. Correlation analysis revealed a tight relationship between the GM and fecal metabolites in VPA rats of both sexes. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, alterations in the GM and fecal metabolites in VPA rats showed sex-specific differences. The therapy for ASD might be different between sexes in the future.
34993724|a|Relatively little has been published about the prevalence of autism in adults with psychiatric disorders. In this study, all new patients referred to an adult psychiatric outpatient clinic in Sweden between November 2019 and October 2020 (n = 562) were screened for autism spectrum disorders using the Ritvo Autism and Asperger Diagnostic Scale Screen (RAADS-14). Out of the 304 (58%) responders, 197 who scored above the cut off (14) were invited to participate in an in-depth assessment. Twenty-six of the 48 that participated in the assessment met criteria for ASD and an additional eight had subthreshold ASD symptoms. We estimated the prevalence of ASD in this population to at least 18.9%, with another 5-10% having subthreshold symptoms.
34993599|a|In this study, we examined autism spectrum disorder (ASD) symptoms in adults with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in comparison with normal controls using the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule, Second Edition (ADOS-2). Sixty-three adults with ADHD (mean age, 35.3 years; 38 men) and 31 controls (mean age, 38.7 years; 17 men) completed Module 4 of the ADOS-2, Autism Spectrum Quotient, Conners' Adult ADHD Rating Scale, and Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale, Third Edition. Adults with ADHD were not clinically diagnosed with ASD, and their ADHD diagnosis was based on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition criteria. Between-group comparisons on the scoring patterns revealed significant ASD symptoms present in adults with ADHD, which was congruent with our previous study. Further, item level and correlation analyses showed the possibility that ASD symptoms in adult ADHD comprised of two distinct mechanisms, one qualitatively similar to ASD and the other arising from ADHD characteristics, highlighting the complex nature of ADHD-ASD symptom overlaps.
34993346|a|Several causative factors are associated with hearing loss (HL) and brain disorders. However, there are many unidentified disease modifiers in these conditions. Our study summarised the most common brain disorders associated with HL and highlighted mechanisms of pathologies. We searched the literature for published articles on HL and brain disorders. Alzheimer's disease/dementia, Parkinson's disease, cognitive impairment, autism spectrum disorder, ataxia, epilepsy, stroke, and hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy majorly co-interact with HL. The estimated incidence rate was 113 per 10,000 person-years. Genetic, epigenetic, early life/neonatal stress, hypoxia, inflammation, nitric oxide infiltration, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and excess glutamate were the distinguished modifiers identified. Various mechanisms like adhesion molecules, transport proteins, hair cell apoptosis, and neurodegeneration have been implicated in these conditions and are serving as potential targets for therapies. To improve the quality of life of patients, these understandings will improve clinical diagnoses and management of HL and brain disorders.
34992888|a|Hydatid cyst is a parasitic disease caused by Echinococcus granulosus or Echinococcus multilocularis. Humans are accidentally infected with the parasite. The cyst is usually found in the liver and lungs and rarely occurs in other body parts. The present article describes a rare case of pelvic hydatid cyst in a young man who presented with nausea, vomiting, and right abdominal pain. Two large cystic masses were discovered during a CT scan in the patient's pelvic region, resulting in right urinary tract hydroureteronephrosis. Additionally, the antibody index was used to confirm the presence of a primary hydatid cyst.
34992290|a|
34992252|a|ZNF711 is one of eleven zinc-finger genes on the X chromosome that have been associated with X-linked intellectual disability. This association is confirmed by the clinical findings in 20 new cases in addition to 11 cases previously reported. No consistent growth aberrations, craniofacial dysmorphology, malformations or neurologic findings are associated with alterations in ZNF711. The intellectual disability is typically mild and coexisting autism occurs in half of the cases. Carrier females show no manifestations. A ZNF711-specific methylation signature has been identified which can assist in identifying new cases and in confirming the pathogenicity of variants in the gene.
34991657|a|Myocyte Enhancer Factor 2 C (MEF2C), one of the transcription factors of the MADS-BOX family, is involved in embryonic brain development, neuronal formation and differentiation, as well as in the growth and pruning of axons and dendrites. MEF2C is also involved in the development of various neuropsychiatric disorders, such as autism spectrum disorders (ASD), epilepsy, schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here, we review the relationship between MEF2C and neuropsychiatric disorders, and provide further insights into the mechanism of these diseases.
34991373|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Interventions that support social communication include several "components," or parts (e.g. strategies for working with children and families, targeting specific skills). Some of these components may be essential for the intervention to work, while others may be recommended or viewed as helpful but not necessary for the intervention to work. "Recommended" components are often described as "adaptable" because they can be changed to improve fit in different settings where interventions are offered or with different individuals. We need to understand which parts of an intervention are essential (and which are adaptable) when translating interventions from research to community settings, but it is challenging to do this before studying an intervention in the community. This article presents the CORE (COmponents & Rationales for Effectiveness) Fidelity Method-a new method for defining the essential components of evidence-based interventions-and applies it to a case example of Reciprocal Imitation Teaching, an intervention that parents are taught to deliver with their young children with social communication delays. The CORE Fidelity Method involves three steps: (1) gathering information from multiple sources; (2) integrating information from previous research and theory; and (3) drafting a CORE model for ongoing use. The benefits of using the CORE Fidelity Method may include: (1) improving consistency in intervention and research materials to help all providers emphasize the most important skills or strategies; (2) clarifying which parts of the intervention can be adapted; and (3) supporting future research that evaluates which intervention components work and how they work.
34991371|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Higher levels of physical activity may be associated with improved sleep in children, but this relationship is still being determined, especially in autistic children. In this study, we used existing data from the 2018 National Survey of Children's Health. Caregivers of children 6-17 years old, including caregivers of autistic children, completed a questionnaire that included questions about physical activity (days active in the past week) and sleep duration. We then determined if children were obtaining the recommended hours of sleep for their age (i.e. sufficient sleep). We found that higher physical activity levels were associated with sufficient sleep duration, but this finding was weaker in autistic children. In particular, this association was not observed in autistic children with more severe autism spectrum disorder, female autistic children, and autistic children 6-12 years old. In conclusion, physical activity is a promising approach to help children obtain sufficient sleep duration. However, more personalized approaches to improving sleep may be needed for certain groups of autistic children.
34991370|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Transitioning Together is an intervention that supports families of adolescents on the autism spectrum as they prepare for the transition to adulthood. While it has been delivered successfully and shown to result in positive outcomes for families in the university setting, questions remain about whether and how well it can be widely provided to families in real-world settings such as high schools. In this study, we analyzed predictors, facilitators, and barriers to providing Transitioning Together to families at 30 high schools across three US states, all of which received training from a team of researchers to deliver this intervention. Our findings highlight struggles and successes with real-world use of the intervention. Seventeen of the 30 schools were successful in providing Transitioning Together to families. Schools who had higher community socioeconomic status, higher quality family involvement, and higher quality transition planning programming before changing anything for this study were much more likely to provide this new intervention to families. Schools who used the intervention were mostly able to deliver it as designed and received positive feedback from families who participated. Common parts of the intervention that schools struggled with most included following the structure of the sessions, including group problem-solving and dialogue in the sessions, and collecting feedback from families. Future research is needed to learn how to make it even easier for public high schools and other service systems to provide this intervention to families, in a way that also maximizes its effectiveness and accessibility for historically underserved autism spectrum populations.
34991353|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Teachers often report concerns about behavior challenges in their students with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in the school setting. Furthermore, teachers often report that they do not have adequate training in how to manage these challenging behaviors effectively. The RUBI program is an intervention initially developed for parents of children with ASD and co-occurring challenging behavior in clinic settings. The present project used school staff input to systematically redesign RUBI to be used with educators in schools. School staff gave input at multiple stages of development to ensure the adapted intervention was appropriate to use in a school setting. Responses were coded and analyzed to identify strengths and weaknesses of the RUBI manual in schools and adaptations were made accordingly. Scores of how appropriate, possible, likable, and usable RUBI would be in schools rose after the intervention was redesigned. The redesigned RUBIES manual may give school staff the tools they need to manage disruptive behaviors. In addition, collaborating with providers over multiple stages to redesign established interventions for new contexts may be a promising way to help bring research tools to practice in the future.
34990580|a|Defects in interneuron migration can disrupt the assembly of cortical circuits and lead to neuropsychiatric disease. Using forebrain assembloids derived by integration of cortical and ventral forebrain organoids, we have previously discovered a cortical interneuron migration defect in Timothy syndrome (TS), a severe neurodevelopmental disease caused by a mutation in the L-type calcium channel (LTCC) Cav1.2. Here, we find that acute pharmacological modulation of Cav1.2 can regulate the saltation length, but not the frequency, of interneuron migration in TS. Interestingly, the defect in saltation length is related to aberrant actomyosin and myosin light chain (MLC) phosphorylation, while the defect in saltation frequency is driven by enhanced gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) sensitivity and can be restored by GABA-A receptor antagonism. Finally, we describe hypersynchronous hCS network activity in TS that is exacerbated by interneuron migration. Taken together, these studies reveal a complex role of LTCC function in human cortical interneuron migration and strategies to restore deficits in the context of disease.
34990576|a|Dilation of the fluid-filled cerebral ventricles (ventriculomegaly) characterizes hydrocephalus and is frequently seen in autism and schizophrenia. Recent work suggests that the genomic study of congenital hydrocephalus may be unexpectedly fertile ground for revealing insights into neural stem cell regulation, human cerebrocortical development, and pathogenesis of neuropsychiatric disease.
34990567|a|PURPOSE: Several systematic reviews have examined parent training programs for families of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The present review expands on this literature by describing the components, delivery methods, and level of parent involvement in parent training programs that target families of children with any neurodisability and comorbid disruptive behavior or other mental health problem. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Following a scoping review protocol, the search strategy included randomized controlled trials of parent training programs conducted with families of children with neurodisabilities and comorbid disruptive behavior or mental health problems. Study characteristics, program content, delivery methods, and theoretical frameworks were extracted from eligible studies. RESULTS: A total of 22 articles were included from the 453 full-text articles initially screened. Thirteen different programs fell into two general categories based on whether they targeted child disruptive behavior or anxiety. Analysis of the content yielded five themes: child skill enhancement, parenting as enacted, parenting as experienced, disability-related parenting, and parent-child relationships. The theoretical underpinnings were identified, when possible, from each study. CONCLUSIONS: Parent training programs for parents of children with neurodisabilities targeting child anxiety involved parents in a complementary role in treatment while those targeting disruptive behavior involved parents in a primary role in creating behavior change. We suggest that the extent of parent involvement in interventions be guided by theory rather than diagnosis of the child.Implications for rehabilitationParents of children living with neurodisabilities play a key role in delivering interventions to address comorbid mental health or behavioral problems.Parent training programs for families of children with neurodisabilities vary in relation to their aims, involvement of parents in delivering interventions, disability-specific content, and delivery methods.When referring families, rehabilitation professionals should be aware of aspects of child, parent, and family relational well-being targeted by parent training programs and, when feasible, give families a choice of the style of program to meet their needs.
34990000|a|BACKGROUND: We previously found that autistic adults who received care through a primary care embedded specialized clinic, called the Center for Autism Services and Transition (CAST), had higher satisfaction, continuity of care, and preventive care use than national samples of autistic adults. OBJECTIVE: Examine the impact of CAST on healthcare utilization and expenditures. DESIGN: Retrospective study of medical billing data. SAMPLE: CAST patients (N = 490) were propensity score matched to Medicare-enrolled autistic adults (N = 980) and privately insured autistic adults (N = 980) using demographic characteristics. The median age of subjects was 21 years, 79% were male, and the median duration of observation was 2.2 years. MAIN MEASURES: We quantified expenditures and utilization for primary care; emergency department (ED) visits; inpatient hospitalizations; mental health admissions; and outpatient visits. KEY RESULTS: CAST patients had the highest primary care utilization and expenditures. However, CAST patients had significantly lower expenditures than Medicare-enrolled autistic adults for mental health admissions ($1074 vs $1903), outpatient visits ($1671 vs $2979), and total expenditures ($5893 vs $6987), as well as 57% fewer inpatient hospitalizations. Compared to privately insured autistic adults, CAST patients had significantly lower expenditures for mental health admissions ($1074 vs $1362), inpatient hospitalizations ($3851 vs $4513), and outpatient visits ($1671 vs $6070), as well as 16% fewer inpatient hospitalizations, 24% fewer ED visits, and 50% fewer outpatient visits. On average, CAST patients had more ED visits, mental health admissions, and outpatient visits than Medicare-enrolled autistic adults and more mental health admissions than privately insured autistic adults. CONCLUSIONS: Although CAST patients had greater primary care utilization and expenditures, our findings suggest embedding specialized clinics within broader primary care settings could be an alternative to current standards of care and may reduce expenditures and healthcare utilization in other areas, particularly relative to standard care for privately insured autistic adults.
34989936|a|Inclusion of students with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) in mainstream schools has a positive impact on their social and daily living behaviors. Our objective was to identify clinical and socio-demographic variables promoting or limiting inclusion in mainstream school through childhood and adolescence. The EpiTED study is a long-term, prospective, multicenter cohort of 281 ASD children included before the age of 7, with a 10-year follow-up in France. Variables significantly linked to inclusion in mainstream school were identified using a mixed-effect logistic regression model: greater autonomy [OR = 1.45 (1.29-1.63)], lesser symptom severity [OR = 0.96 (0.92-0.99)] and fewer siblings [OR = 0.86 (0.75-0.99)]. In the multivariate model, the probability for a child of being included in mainstream school decreased over time [OR = 0.91 (0.85-0.97)], i.e. with age.
34989672|a|
34988901|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a common neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by limitations in mutual communication and social interaction as well as restricted, repetitive patterns of behaviors, interests, or activities. The possible role of biological abnormalities in the etiopathogenesis of this disorder arouses research interest in this area. This is a case-control study evaluating epithelial barrier function by comparing serum concentrations of occludin and zonulin in children with ASD (n = 60) and controls (n = 30). The Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) was used to evaluate autism symptom levels in all children. Serum occludin and zonulin levels were analyzed using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Serum occludin was significantly lower in children with ASD than in control subjects. In children with ASD, a decrease in occludin level was significantly associated with the disorder symptom levels items mean score (CARS total scores). Our findings showed that children with ASD had alterations in epithelial barrier function compared to the control group. The investigation of the mechanism underlying the different levels of occludin between ASD and controls may be of importance in clarifying the etiopathogenesis of ASD, as well as its follow-up and treatment.
34988863|a|OBJECTIVE: To develop, implement, and assess implementation outcomes for a developmental monitoring and referral program for children in the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC). METHODS: Based on Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's Learn the Signs. Act Early. campaign, the program was developed and replicated in two phases at 20 demographically diverse WIC clinics in eastern Missouri. Parents were asked to complete developmental milestone checklists for their children, ages 2 months to 4 years, during WIC eligibility recertification visits; WIC staff referred children with potential concerns to their healthcare providers for developmental screening. WIC staff surveys and focus groups were used to assess initial implementation outcomes. RESULTS: In both phases, all surveyed staff (n = 46) agreed the program was easy to use. Most (>= 80%) agreed that checklists fit easily into clinic workflow and required <= 5 min to complete. Staff (>= 55%) indicated using checklists with >= 75% of their clients. 92% or more reported referring one or more children with potential developmental concerns. According to 80% of staff, parents indicated checklists helped them learn about development and planned to share them with healthcare providers. During the second phase, 18 of 20 staff surveyed indicated the program helped them learn when to refer children and how to support parents, and 19 felt the program promoted healthy development. Focus groups supported survey findings, and all clinics planned to sustain the program. CONCLUSIONS: Initial implementation outcomes supported this approach to developmental monitoring and referral in WIC. The program has potential to help low-income parents identify possible concerns and access support.
34988713|a|While it is known that intrauterine growth restriction is associated with later mental disorders, it is still unclear whether similar associations exists for postnatal weight faltering, also known as 'failure to thrive' in infancy. This study examined the potential connection between infancy weight faltering and mental disorders diagnosed in childhood focusing specifically on neurodevelopmental disorders. The Copenhagen Child Cohort (CCC2000) was used to explore weight gain in infancy assessed by community health nurses. Data from the Danish national registries were used to quantify ICD-10 mental disorders diagnosed between birth and 12 years of age, as well as potential child and family confounders. Of 4.476 children with sufficient weight data, 339 (7.3%) children were diagnosed with a mental disorder in childhood. Both any (weight gain < -1SD) and severe infancy weight faltering (weight gain < -2SD) were associated with psychomotor delays, while severe infancy weight faltering was also associated with intellectual impairments. Notably, no significant associations were found between weight faltering and autism spectrum disorders or attention deficit hyperactivity disorders. Weight faltering in infancy may be an early marker of neurodevelopmental delays. This possibility should be considered when assessing infants with slow weight gain, to early identification and treatment of co-occurring neurodevelopmental disorders.
34988366|a|Autism specific transition resources (T-Res) aims to develop a flexible resource package to support children and young people with a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), as well as their families and educators, during the loosening and/or lifting of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) related restrictions on movement. A secondary aim is to determine the current and long-term impacts of the COVID-19 related restrictions on the wellbeing of individuals with autism spectrum disorders and their parents/caregivers. Measuring and addressing the psychosocial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions in movement is of prime importance at this time.  The impacts of this crisis will be far reaching and many may not be realised for many years. The proposed research will focus on children and young people with a diagnosis of ASD, their families and educators.  The ASD population alone is sizable with 14,000 (or 1.55%) of students in schools holding a diagnosis. When parents, teachers, tutors and special needs assistants (SNAs) are also considered this is a considerable group. The proposed research has the potential to have impacts that are social, psychological, educational and economic. This will be achieved through development of an online transition package to guide parents and educators in preparing children and young people for the resumption of regular daily routines following the lifting of COVID-19 restrictions.  This resource will be developed based on the needs of families and young people, as measured through surveys, as well as expert consensus on the targets and means of intervention.  This ambitious project can be commenced quickly and is designed to produce outputs quickly, which will in turn be disseminated to key stakeholders.
34988286|a|Introduction: Primary care clinicians report inadequate training and lack of support regarding identification of early signs of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), resulting in later diagnosis and poor outcomes. The objective of this study was to evaluate the perception of participants in ECHO Autism project regarding the value of the virtual collaborative as a mentoring tool. Methods: We completed a retrospective cross-sectional study of post-virtual clinic surveys of all participants who attended Autism ECHO from September 2, 2015 to June 5, 2019. Results: There were 87 Autism ECHO sessions held, with 83 didactic presentations. A total of 92 de-identified patient cases were discussed with 490 unique learners in attendance. Participants reported increase in self-efficacy in identifying ASD symptoms in children, assessing medical comorbidities, and learning new information. Discussion: Continuing education platforms in healthcare professions are increasingly embracing virtual live-interactive conferences. They provide opportunities to connect with experts, but also hear from peers regarding real-life case examples. During COVID-19 pandemic ECHO Autism was a lifeline for rural providers and will likely continue to increase in participation.
34987918|a|The foot is the most common anatomic site for foreign body embedment in both children and adults. An 11-year-old boy boy with a history of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), learning disorder, and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) was brought to our ED with a pencil deeply embedded in his right foot. The broken portion of the pencil was completely embedded in his right foot, with mild bleeding and it could not be extracted easily. The pencil was eventually mobilized via gentle back-and-forth twisting motion, which allowed successful removal of a significant portion of the embedded pencil. To establish the presence of a foreign body, as in each X-ray, the affected body part should be imaged in at least two directions. Based on the density of the embedded foreign body, ultrasound imaging should be considered.
34987551|a|Christianson syndrome (CS) is an X-linked neurodevelopmental syndrome characterized by microcephaly, epilepsy, ataxia, and severe generalized developmental delay. Pathogenic mutations in the SLC9A6 gene, which encodes the Na+/H+ exchanger protein member 6 (NHE6), are associated with CS and autism spectrum disorder in males. In this study, whole exome sequencing (WES) and Sanger sequencing revealed a novel de novo frameshift variant c.1548_1549insT of SLC9A6 in a 14-month-old boy with early-onset seizures. According to The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG)/the Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP) guidelines, the variant was classified as pathogenic. The proband presented with several core symptoms of typical epilepsy, including microcephaly, motor delay, distal muscle weakness, micrognathia, occasional unprovoked laughter, swallowing and speech difficulties. Electroencephalography (EEG) showed spikes-slow waves in frontal pole, frontal, anterior temporal and frontal midline point areas. Gesell development schedules (GDS) indicated generalized developmental delay. We also summarized all the reported variants and analyzed the correlation of genotype and phenotype of CS. Our study extends the mutation spectrum of the SLC9A6 gene, and it might imply that the phenotypes of CS are not correlated with SLC9A6 genotypes.
34987421|a|Background: Many phenotypic studies have estimated the degree of comorbidity between Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), but few have examined the latent, or unobserved, structure of combined ASD and ADHD symptoms. This is an important perquisite toward better understanding the overlap between ASD and ADHD. Methods: We conducted a scoping review of studies that examined the factor or latent class structure of ASD and ADHD symptoms within the same clinical or general population sample. Results: Eight studies met final inclusion criteria. Four factor analysis studies found that ASD and ADHD domains loaded separately and one found that some ASD and ADHD domains loaded together. In the three latent class studies, there were evidence of profiles with high levels of co-occurring ASD and ADHD symptoms. Conclusions: Our scoping review provides some evidence of phenotypic overlap between ASD and ADHD at the latent, or unobserved, level, particularly when using a "person-centered" (latent class analysis) vs. a "variable-centered" (factor analysis) approach.
34987232|a|Intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are common, and genetic testing is increasingly performed in individuals with these diagnoses to inform prognosis, refine management and provide information about recurrence risk in the family. For neurogenetic conditions associated with intellectual disability and ASD, data on natural history in adults are scarce; however, as older adults with these disorders are identified, it is becoming clear that some conditions are associated with both neurodevelopmental problems and neurodegeneration. Moreover, emerging evidence indicates that some neurogenetic conditions associated primarily with neurodegeneration also affect neurodevelopment. In this Perspective, we discuss examples of diseases that have developmental and degenerative overlap. We propose that neurogenetic disorders should be studied continually across the lifespan to understand the roles of the affected genes in brain development and maintenance, and to inform strategies for treatment.
34987169|a|Epidemiological studies and work in animal models indicate that immune activation may be a risk factor for autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). We measured levels of 60 cytokines and growth factors in 869 maternal mid-gestational (MMG) and 807 child cord blood (CB) plasma samples from 457 ASD (385 boys, 72 girls) and 497 control children (418 boys, 79 girls) from the Norwegian Autism Birth Cohort. We analyzed associations first using sex-stratified unadjusted and adjusted logistic regression models, and then employed machine learning strategies (LASSO + interactions, Random Forests, XGBoost classifiers) with cross-validation and randomly sampled test set evaluation to assess the utility of immune signatures as ASD biomarkers. We found prominent case-control differences in both boys and girls with alterations in a wide range of analytes in MMG and CB plasma including but not limited to IL1RA, TNFalpha, Serpin E1, VCAM1, VEGFD, EGF, CSF1, and CSF2. MMG findings were most striking, with particularly strong effect sizes in girls. Models did not change appreciably upon adjustment for maternal conditions, medication use, or emotional distress ratings. Findings were corroborated using machine learning approaches, with area under the receiver operating characteristic curve values in the test sets ranging from 0.771 to 0.965. Our results are consistent with gestational immunopathology in ASD, may provide insights into sex-specific differences, and have the potential to lead to biomarkers for early diagnosis.
34986873|a|
34986807|a|BACKGROUND: Imitation skills play a crucial role in social cognitive development from early childhood. Many studies have shown a deficit in imitation skills in children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Little is known about the development of imitation behaviors in children with ASD. This study aims to measure the trajectories of early imitation skills in preschoolers with ASD and how these skills impact other areas of early development. METHODS: For this purpose, we assessed imitation, language, and cognition skills in 177 children with ASD and 43 typically developing children (TD) aged 2 to 5 years old, 126 of which were followed longitudinally, yielding a total of 396 time points. RESULTS: Our results confirmed the presence of an early imitation deficit in toddlers with ASD compared to TD children. The study of the trajectories showed that these difficulties were marked at the age of 2 years and gradually decreased until the age of 5 years old. Imitation skills were strongly linked with cognitive and language skills and level of symptoms in our ASD group at baseline. Moreover, the imitation skills at baseline were predictive of the language gains a year later in our ASD group. Using a data-driven clustering method, we delineated different developmental trajectories of imitation skills within the ASD group. CONCLUSIONS: The clinical implications of the findings are discussed, particularly the impact of an early imitation deficit on other areas of competence of the young child.
34986090|a|
34986033|a|INTRODUCTION: This study was designed to assess current recommendations from child neurologists and epileptologists on masking for school-age children with epilepsy. METHODS: A 7-item survey was created and sent out to members of the Child Neurology Society and Pediatric Epilepsy Research Consortium in August of 2021 to assess current practice and provider recommendations on masking. RESULTS: One hundred four individuals participated with representation from all regions of the United States. Masking was recommended by 95.1%, with 63.4% (n = 66) noting exception of those with severe intellectual disability, autism, and behavioral problems. Of those who write exemption letters, 54% write these <5% of the time. Only 3% reported potential adverse events associated with masking. CONCLUSION: Nearly all respondents recommended masking for school-age children with epilepsy. Potential risks of masking and adverse events were low. Improved guidance on masking is needed to ensure academic success of our patients with epilepsy.
34985973|a|[Figure: see text].
34985719|a|Research has documented inequities in geographic access to Board Certified Behavior Analysts (BCBAs) among children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, research on their accessibility is outdated. Between July 1, 2018 and July 1, 2021 the number of BCBAs in the U.S. increased by 65%, from 27,320 to 45,103. In this study we examined trends in geographic access to BCBAs among children with ASD between 2018 and 2021. The sample included all U.S. counties in 50 states and D.C. (N = 3138). Using GIS software we examined change in county-level access to BCBAs between 2018 and 2021 and mapped ASD/BCBA ratios across all counties in both years. Study results indicate that despite modest improvements (e.g., 266 counties added BCBAs), inequitable access persists.
34985527|a|Importance: Neurodevelopmental disorders are associated with poor health and social outcomes. Population-based data on incidence, age at diagnosis, and demographic variations are essential to identify modifiable risk factors and inform the planning of services and interventions. Objectives: To assess the incidence and timing of diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disorders during childhood in the US and to evaluate differences by population characteristics. Design, Setting, and Participants: This population-based cohort study used nationwide data on birth cohorts nested in the 2000-2014 Medicaid Analytic eXtract and the 2003-2015 IBM MarketScan Research Database on 2 070 541 publicly and 1 309 900 privately insured children enrolled at birth. Data were analyzed between May 1, 2020, and June 30, 2021. Main Outcomes and Measures: Neurodevelopmental disorders, autism spectrum disorders, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, learning disabilities, speech or language disorders, developmental coordination disorders, intellectual disabilities, and behavioral disorders were identified based on validated algorithms. Kaplan-Meier analyses were used to estimate the incidence and timing of diagnosis, stratified by child's sex, birth year, maternal age at delivery, and race and ethnicity. Results: The cohorts comprised 2 070 541 publicly insured children (1 045 426 boys [50.5%]) and 1 309 900 privately insured children (667 607 boys [51.0%]) enrolled at birth. By 8 years of age, 23.9% of publicly insured children and 11.0% of privately insured children received a diagnosis of 1 or more neurodevelopmental disorders (autism spectrum disorder, 1.6% and 1.3%; attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, 14.5% and 5.8%; learning disability, 1.2% and 0.6%; speech or language disorder, 8.4% and 4.5%; developmental coordination disorder, 0.9% and 0.7%; intellectual disability, 0.7% and 0.1%; and behavioral disorder, 8.4% and 1.5%). Risks were substantially higher among boys (incidence of >=1 neurodevelopmental disorder by age 8 years for boys vs girls: 30.7% vs 16.7% among publicly insured children and 15.0% vs 6.7% among privately insured children) and White children (30.2% vs 9.1% among Asian children, 23.0% among Black children, 15.4% among Hispanic children, and 22.7% among children of unknown race or ethnicity; information on race and ethnicity was available only for publicly insured children). The association of maternal age and birth year with incidence of neurodevelopmental disorders varied by outcome. Except for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, the diagnosis tended to be established somewhat earlier for privately insured children. The association of race and ethnicity with age at diagnosis varied by outcome. Co-occurring neurodevelopmental disorders were common, especially among children with autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability (>70% had >=1 other disorder). Conclusions and Relevance: In this population-based cohort study, a relatively high incidence of and co-occurrence of neurodevelopmental disorders as well as the disparity in incidence and timing of diagnosis by insurance type and race and ethnicity were found. These findings represent important public health concerns and underscore the need for timely and accessible developmental assessments and educational services to help reduce the burden of these disorders.
34985325|a|The human body is full of an extensive number of commensal microbes, consisting of bacteria, viruses, and fungi, collectively termed the human microbiome. The initial acquisition of microbiota occurs from both the external and maternal environments, and the vast majority of them colonize the gastrointestinal tract (GIT). These microbial communities play a central role in the maturation and development of the immune system, the central nervous system, and the GIT system and are also responsible for essential metabolic pathways. Various factors, including host genetic predisposition, environmental factors, lifestyle, diet, antibiotic or nonantibiotic drug use, etc., affect the composition of the gut microbiota. Recent publications have highlighted that an imbalance in the gut microflora, known as dysbiosis, is associated with the onset and progression of neurological disorders. Moreover, characterization of the microbiome-host cross talk pathways provides insight into novel therapeutic strategies. Novel preclinical and clinical research on interventions related to the gut microbiome for treating neurological conditions, including autism spectrum disorders, Parkinson's disease, schizophrenia, multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, epilepsy, and stroke, hold significant promise. This review aims to present a comprehensive overview of the potential involvement of the human gut microbiome in the pathogenesis of neurological disorders, with a particular emphasis on the potential of microbe-based therapies and/or diagnostic microbial biomarkers. This review also discusses the potential health benefits of the administration of probiotics, prebiotics, postbiotics, and synbiotics and fecal microbiota transplantation in neurological disorders.
34985196|a|INTRODUCTION: Angelman syndrome (AS) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder caused by mutation or loss of UBE3A and marked by intellectual disability, ataxia, autism-like symptoms, and other atypical behaviors. One route to treatment may lie in the role that environment plays early in postnatal life. Environmental enrichment (EE) is one manipulation that has shown therapeutic potential in preclinical models of many brain disorders, including neurodevelopmental disorders. Here, we examined whether postweaning EE can rescue behavioral phenotypes in Ube3a maternal deletion mice (AS mice), and whether any improvements are sex-dependent. METHODS: Male and female mice (C57BL/6J Ube3atm1Alb mice and wild-type (WT) littermates; >=10 mice/group) were randomly assigned to standard housing (SH) or EE at weaning. EE had a larger footprint, a running wheel, and a variety of toys that promoted foraging, burrowing, and climbing. Following 6 weeks of EE, animals were submitted to a battery of tests that reliably elicit behavioral deficits in AS mice, including rotarod, open field, marble burying, and forced swim; weights were also monitored. RESULTS: In male AS-EE mice, we found complete restoration of motor coordination, marble burying, and forced swim behavior to the level of WT-SH mice. We also observed a complete normalization of exploratory distance traveled in the open field, but we found no rescue of vertical behavior or center time. AS-EE mice also had weights comparable to WT-SH mice. Intriguingly, in the female AS-EE mice, we found a failure of EE to rescue the same behavioral deficits relative to female WT-SH mice. CONCLUSIONS: Environmental enrichment is an effective route to correcting the most penetrant phenotypes in male AS mice but not female AS mice. This finding has important implications for the translatability of early behavioral intervention for AS patients, most importantly the potential dependency of treatment response on sex.
34984993|a|
34984773|a|BACKGROUND: Pragmatics has generally been defined as the ability to use language in social situations, it is commonly regarded as the third major component of language ability. To date, there is no tool for assessing early pragmatic development of Chinese-speaking children. AIMS: To describe the translation of the Language Use Inventory (LUI) from English to Mandarin Chinese and to report findings on the Chinese version's reliability, validity and developmental sensitivity. METHODS & PROCEDURES: The original English version of the LUI was translated into Mandarin Chinese. Parents of 177 typically developing (TD) toddlers and preschool children completed the inventory to examine its internal reliability and construct validity and how scores differed across ages and sexes. A total of 31 parents out of the 177 completed the LUI-Mandarin, again within 4 weeks, to assess test-retest reliability. To examine discriminative validity, 43 parents of age- and sex-matched TD children and children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) recruited from Nanjing Brain Hospital affiliated with Nanjing Medical University completed the LUI-Mandarin. OUTCOMES & RESULTS: Cronbach's alpha values for the LUI-Mandarin's three parts and for 11 of 12 LUI-Mandarin subscales were 0.707-0.992, with most values in the 0.825-0.992 range. Test-retest reliability ranged from 0.66 to 0.95, indicating good to excellent reliability. Factor analysis of the LUI-Mandarin revealed two different factors, and the total variance explained was 74.38%. The LUI-Mandarin total scores and subscale scores increased with age for both boys and girls, providing evidence of the inventory's developmental sensitivity. Girls, however, had higher total scores than boys at earlier ages (18-23 months). The results of the discriminant validity study revealed that performance was significantly lower in the ASD group than in the TD group with respect to LUI total scores and subscale scores (except for subscale A). CONCLUSIONS & IMPLICATIONS: The LUI-Mandarin is the first and only questionnaire available in China that evaluates the pragmatic language skills of children aged between 18 and 47 months. The results of the study show that the LUI-Mandarin is a valid and reliable tool for Chinese toddlers and preschool children. WHAT THIS PAPER ADDS: What is already known on this subject The LUI is a parent-report questionnaire that can provide comprehensive information about very young children's communicative competence. It is widely used both for assessment and to guide intervention. Additionally, it has been translated into French, Italian, Polish, Arabic, Portuguese and Norwegian and it shows good reliability and validity. What this paper adds to existing knowledge In the present study we describe the translation of the LUI from English to Mandarin Chinese and report findings on the Chinese version's reliability, validity and developmental sensitivity. What are the potential or actual clinical implications of this work? The LUI-Mandarin is the first and only questionnaire available in China that can evaluate pragmatic language skills of children aged between 18 and 47 months. The results show that the LUI-Mandarin is a valid and reliable tool for use with Chinese toddlers and preschool children.
34984734|a|BACKGROUND: Down syndrome (DS) is associated with elevated rates of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and autism symptomatology. To better characterise heterogeneity in ASD symptomatology in DS, profiles of caregiver-reported ASD symptoms were modelled for children and adolescents with DS. METHODS: Participants (n = 125) were recruited through several multi-site research studies on cognition and language in DS. Using the Social Responsiveness Scale-2 (SRS-2; Constantino and Gruber 2012), two latent profile analyses (LPA) were performed, one on the broad composite scores of social communication and interaction and restricted interests and repetitive behaviour, and a second on the four social dimensions of social communication, social motivation, social awareness, and social cognition. RESULTS: A three-profile model was the best fit for both analyses, with each analysis yielding a low ASD symptom profile, an elevated or mixed ASD symptom profile and a high ASD symptom profile. Associations were observed between profile probability scores and IQ, the number of co-occurring biomedical conditions reported, sex, and SRS-2 form. CONCLUSIONS: Characterising heterogeneity in ASD symptom profiles can inform more personalised supports in this population, and implications for potential therapeutic approaches for individuals with DS are discussed.
34984640|a|Inconsistent data are available on mental rotation performance in neurotypicals with high autistic-like traits. Here, we tested whether global-local visual processing abilities mediate the influence of specific autistic-like trait domains (social skill, attention switching, attention-to-detail, communication, and imagination) on mental rotation. Neurotypical participants (N = 128) underwent an assessment of autistic-like traits, a flanker task with hierarchical stimuli, and a mental rotation task. Path analysis showed that Reaction Times on the incongruent/local condition of the flanker task mediated the relationship between attention-to-detail and mental rotation accuracy. These findings indicate that a better capacity of ignoring incongruent global information to identify local information (reduced global interference) in persons with high non-social autistic-like traits, as attention-to-detail, facilitates mental rotation performance.
34984639|a|Autism-Assistance Dogs (AADs) are highly-skilled service animals trained primarily to ensure the safety of an autistic child by preventing elopement and mitigating 'meltdowns'. Although anecdotal accounts and case-studies have indicated that AADs confer benefits above and beyond safety, empirical support anchored in validated clinical, behavioral, and physiological measures is lacking. To address this gap, we studied children and their families before and after receiving a well-trained AAD using a within-subject, repeated-measures design. Notably, this study is the first to assess change in a biomarker for chronic stress in both autistic children and their parents. Final analyses included pre-/post-AAD data from 11 triads (parent/handler-dog-child) demonstrating significantly positive psychosocial and biobehavioral effects of AADs.
34984638|a|Multimodal imaging studies targeting preschoolers and low-functioning autism spectrum disorder (ASD) patients are scarce. We applied machine learning classifiers to parameters from T1-weighted MRI and DTI data of 58 children with ASD (age 3-6 years) and 48 typically developing controls (TDC). Classification performance reached an accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of 88.8%, 93.0%, and 83.8%, respectively. The most prominent features were the cortical thickness of the right inferior occipital gyrus, mean diffusivity of the middle cerebellar peduncle, and nodal efficiency of the left posterior cingulate gyrus. Machine learning-based analysis of MRI data was useful in distinguishing low-functioning ASD preschoolers from TDCs. Combination of T1 and DTI improved classification accuracy about 10%, and large-scale multi-modal MRI studies are warranted for external validation.
34984596|a|Aluminum (Al) is linked to the development of many neurological disorders such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease, and autism. Centella asiatica (CA) is a regenerating herb traditionally used to stimulate memory. This study was designed to assess the neuroprotective role of ethanolic extract of CA (CAE) in AlCl3-induced neurological conditions in rats. Adult rats were chronically treated with AlCl3 (100 mg/kg b.w./day) for 60 days to establish the dementia model, and co-administration of CAE was evaluated for its ability to attenuate the toxic effect of AlCl3. CAE was given orally at a dose of 150 and 300 mg/kg b.w./day, for 60 days. The behavioral performances of rats were tested through Y-maze and open field tests. Lipid peroxidation, superoxide dismutase, and catalase activity were evaluated to measure oxidative stress; and acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity was assessed to evaluate cholinergic dysfunction in the rat brain. H&E staining was used to assess structural abnormalities in the cortex and hippocampus. The result showed that AlCl3 induces cognitive dysfunction (impaired learning and memory, anxiety, diminished locomotor activity), oxidative stress, cholinergic impairment, and histopathological alteration in the rat brain. Co-administration of CAE with AlCl3 markedly protects the brain from AlCl3-induced cognitive dysfunction, oxidative stress, AChE activity, and cytoarchitectural alterations. Furthermore, 15 days CAE treatment after 45 days AlCl3 administration markedly ameliorates the AlCl3-induced neurotoxicity indicating its potential for therapeutic use.
34984456|a|Despite abundant research and clinical evidence of the effectiveness of music interventions for people in the autism spectrum, understanding of music processing in this community is limited. We explored whether research evidence of differences in music processing within the autistic community is available. We developed a scoping review to search for literature with the terms "music", "processing," and "autism" (and variants). We searched PubMed, CINAHL, Scopus, Web of Science, PsycInfo, Academic Search Complete, ERIC, and Music Index databases for a total of 10,857 articles, with 5,236 duplicates. The remaining 5,621 titles and abstracts were screened for eligibility by a team of four undergraduate and graduate students and the PI. Seventy-five studies were included for data extraction. Data were analyzed with descriptive statistics regarding author, study, stimulus, and participant information, and a thematic analysis of outcome and findings. Our findings are preliminary given the emerging nature of the literature, the use of mostly non-musical auditory stimuli, passive listening experiences, and underreported demographics. However, the literature shows some evidence of differences in music processing for autistic individuals, including reduced habituation to non-musical and musical stimuli; truncated, delayed, or divergent developmental trajectories; and possible compensatory higher-order mechanisms that yield similar behavioral responses even in the presence of divergent neural correlates. Music therapists are encouraged to adopt a developmental perspective, not only of general skills, but specifically of music skill development in this community, and to extrapolate these findings with caution, given the current limitations in the evidence.
34984324|a|The complex 16p11.2 deletion syndrome (16pdel) is accompanied by neurological disorders, including epilepsy, autism spectrum disorder, and intellectual disability. We demonstrated that 16pdel iPSC differentiated neurons from affected people show augmented local field potential activity and altered ceramide-related lipid species relative to unaffected. FAM57B, a poorly characterized gene in the 16p11.2 interval, has emerged as a candidate tied to symptomatology. We found that FAM57B modulates ceramide synthase (CerS) activity, but is not a CerS per se. In FAM57B mutant human neuronal cells and zebrafish brain, composition and levels of sphingolipids and glycerolipids associated with cellular membranes are disrupted. Consistently, we observed aberrant plasma membrane architecture and synaptic protein mislocalization, which were accompanied by depressed brain and behavioral activity. Together, these results suggest that haploinsufficiency of FAM57B contributes to changes in neuronal activity and function in 16pdel syndrome through a crucial role for the gene in lipid metabolism.
34984002|a|Purpose: This study aims to examine the differences in physical activity and motor performance between young children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and children with typical development (TD) and to investigate the relationships between the levels of physical activity and motor performance. Patients and Methods: Twenty-five children with ASD (mean age = 59.3 +- 8.1 months) and 28 children with TD (mean age = 63.1 +- 8.6 months) were recruited. The Actigraph accelerometer, Movement Assessment Battery for Children-second edition, and Assessment of Preschool Children's Participation were used. Results: Young children with ASD spent significantly less time in moderate and light physical activity and exhibited more sedentary behavior than did children with TD. Those children with ASD also had greater motor difficulties and engaged less frequently in physical recreation activities compared to their TD peers. Motor performance was significantly correlated with physical activity in all children. Conclusion: This study highlighted the specificity of the levels of physical activity, motor difficulties, and participation diversity in children with ASD comparing performances on children with TD. Additional research is needed to provide valuable information for early interventions.
34983638|a|BACKGROUND: Existing research has demonstrated elevated autistic behaviours in children with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), but the autistic phenotype and its relationship to other neurodevelopmental manifestations of NF1 remains unclear. To address this gap, we performed detailed characterisation of autistic behaviours in children with NF1 and investigated their association with other common NF1 child characteristics. METHODS: Participants were drawn from a larger cross-sectional study examining autism in children with NF1. The population analysed in this study scored above threshold on the Social Responsiveness Scale-Second Edition (T-score >= 60; 51% larger cohort) and completed the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R) and/or the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule-Second Edition (ADOS-2). All participants underwent evaluation of their intellectual function, and behavioural data were collected via parent questionnaires. RESULTS: The study cohort comprised 68 children (3-15 years). Sixty-three per cent met the ADOS-2 'autism spectrum' cut-off, and 34% exceeded the more stringent threshold for 'autistic disorder' on the ADI-R. Social communication symptoms were common and wide-ranging, while restricted and repetitive behaviours (RRBs) were most commonly characterised by 'insistence on sameness' (IS) behaviours such as circumscribed interests and difficulties with minor changes. Autistic behaviours were weakly correlated with hyperactive/impulsive attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) symptoms but not with inattentive ADHD or other behavioural characteristics. Language and verbal IQ were weakly related to social communication behaviours but not to RRBs. LIMITATIONS: Lack of genetic validation of NF1, no clinical diagnosis of autism, and a retrospective assessment of autistic behaviours in early childhood. CONCLUSIONS: Findings provide strong support for elevated autistic behaviours in children with NF1. While these behaviours were relatively independent of other NF1 comorbidities, the importance of taking broader child characteristics into consideration when interpreting data from autism-specific measures in this population is highlighted. Social communication deficits appear similar to those observed in idiopathic autism and are coupled with a unique RRB profile comprising prominent IS behaviours. This autistic phenotype and its relationship to common NF1 comorbidities such as anxiety and executive dysfunction will be important to examine in future research. Current findings have important implications for the early identification of autism in NF1 and clinical management.
34983360|a|BACKGROUND: Phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN) is a cancer suppressor gene. Constitutional mutations affecting this gene are associated with several conditions, collectively termed PTEN hamartoma tumour syndromes (PHTS). In addition to hamartomas, PTEN aberrations have been associated with a range of non-tumoural phenotypes such as macrocephaly, and research indicates possibly increased rates of developmental delay and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) for people with germline mutations affecting PTEN. METHOD: A systematic review of literature reporting behavioural and psychological variables for people with constitutional PTEN mutations/PHTS was conducted using four databases. Following in-depth screening, 25 articles met the inclusion criteria and were used in the review. Fourteen papers reported the proportion of people with PTEN mutations/PTHS meeting criteria for or having characteristics of ASD and were thus used in a pooled prevalence meta-analysis. RESULTS: Meta-analysis using a random effects model estimated pooled prevalence of ASD characteristics at 25% (95% CI 16-33%), although this should be interpreted cautiously due to possible biases in existing literature. Intellectual disability and developmental delay (global, motor and speech and language) were also reported frequently. Emotional difficulties and impaired cognitive functioning in specific domains were noted but assessed/reported less frequently. Methods of assessment of psychological/behavioural factors varied widely (with retrospective examination of medical records common). CONCLUSIONS: Existing research suggests approximately 25% of people with constitutional PTEN mutations may meet criteria for or have characteristics of ASD. Studies have also begun to establish a range of possible cognitive impairments in affected individuals, especially when ASD is also reported. However, further large-scale studies are needed to elucidate psychological/behavioural corollaries of this mutation, and how they may relate to physiological/physical characteristics.
34983251|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Publicly funded mental health services play an important role in caring for school-age children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD); however, therapists report a lack of specialized ASD training, which families identity as a barrier in obtaining mental health services for their children. An Individualized Mental Health Intervention for ASD (AIM HI) was developed in collaboration with community stakeholders to respond to identified needs of children and community therapists. The current study examined the effects of therapist training in AIM HI on the changes in therapist practice, including therapists' use of evidence-based intervention strategies in session. Data were collected from a study conducted in community outpatient and school based mental health programs randomly assigned to receive AIM HI therapist training or observation of routine care. Therapist and child clients were enrolled from participating programs. Therapists in AIM HI training received training and consultation for 6 months while delivering the AIM HI intervention to a participating client; therapists in usual care delivered routine care. Both groups of therapists video recorded psychotherapy sessions which were scored by trained raters. Differences between training groups were examined using multilevel modeling. Therapists trained in AIM HI were observed to use more extensive active teaching strategies with caregivers, engagement strategies with children, strategies promoting continuity of care, and had more structured sessions with more effective pursuit of caregiver and children skill teaching. Therapist licensure moderated some training outcomes.
34983217|a|Recognition of autism and the associated co-occurring physical and mental health issues has increased over recent years. However, undergraduate and postgraduate curricula take time to adapt and to impact on what is delivered in training so healthcare professionals, including doctors, report little training on these topics. Doctors need to know when someone might be autistic in order to respond to them appropriately. This article sets out the reasons why recognition of autism is important and the positive impacts of recognising and understanding autism on health outcomes, service delivery and patient experience. The negative consequences of not recognising autism or understanding the impact of autistic traits on the person are also explored. A companion article then covers how practice can be made more appropriate for autistic people to improve outcomes.
34983215|a|The accompanying article set out why it is important to identify autistic people and the negative consequences of not recognising or understanding autism, including more severe illness and premature death. This article sets out what clinicians can do to help reduce those negative consequences by making 'reasonable adjustments' in any healthcare service in which they work.
34983079|a|OBJECTIVE: Our objective is to explore the change in the severity of ADHD, ODD and anxiety during a two-month lockdown among children in France and the moderating role of behavioural regulation. METHOD: In 235 children with ADHD, the symptom severity of ADHD, ODD and anxiety was investigated one and two months after the beginning of lockdown, and one month after its end. Behavioural regulation skills were estimated with the Behaviour Regulation Index. RESULTS: ADHD, ODD and anxiety scores were increasing or decreasing depending on BRI. CONCLUSION: Baseline behavioural regulation skills may act as a moderating factor for the persistence of ADHD, ODD and anxiety symptoms related to the lockdown.
34982474|a|There is currently a paucity of neuroscientific data recorded from more severely affected individuals with autism spectrum conditions (ASC). Enabling data collection to take place in a more familiar environment, that is, at home, may increase access to research participation in this group. Here, we present a new accessible method of studying brain activity of autistic individuals outside the laboratory in their home environment, using mobile electroencephalography (EEG) technology. The primary aim of the present study was to test the feasibility of acquiring good quality EEG data from autistic children at home, assessed via a set of objective data quality metrics, and to develop a list of practical guidelines on how to successfully conduct an EEG experiment in such a naturalistic setting based directly upon participants' views. To demonstrate the utility of this method, we evaluated the EEG signal quality recorded from 69 children with ASC at home using a gel-based Eego Sports mobile EEG system. Five key indicators of data quality were assessed. Our results demonstrate that it is possible to record high quality EEG signal from children with ASC at home, generating data that could address a number of research questions. A user experience survey identified areas of good practice, which researchers should take into consideration when designing mobile EEG studies aiming to acquire data from children with ASC at a home environment.
34982431|a|OBJECTIVE: The grieving process in parents of these children is an ongoing and cyclic one since there is no real end to it. We explored the experience of grief and feelings of loss in fathers of children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), in the west and northwest of Iran. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This qualitative study was conducted using content analysis. Fourteen fathers took part in a semi-structured interview. RESULTS: Six categories were identified in relation to the stages of grief: 1- "Uncertainty of dealing with the unpleasant unknown"; 2- "Being hurt and broken inside"; 3- "Isolation and concealment as a consequence of the pressure caused by ignorance"; 4- "Search for cause"; 5- "Search for a cure"; 6- "Breaking or blooming". CONCLUSIONS: Fathers of children with ASD go through intense and continuous sorrow and grief. According to our findings, it is recommended that health care professionals work collaboratively with fathers and provide support upon receiving the diagnosis of their child.
34982326|a|Whether there is a relationship between oxytocin (OXT) use in labor and the risk of autism (ASD), and the nature of such relationship, is unclear. By integrating genetic and clinical data in a sample of 176 ASD participants, we tested the hypothesis that OXT is a marker for abnormal prenatal development which leads to impairments in the process of labor. OXT-exposed ASD had more obstetric complications (P = 0.031), earlier onset of symptoms (P = 0.027), poorer cognitive development (P = 0.011), higher mutation burden across neurodevelopment genes (P = 0.020; OR = 5.33) and lower transmission of polygenic risk for ASD (P = 0.0319), than non-exposed ASD. OXT seems to constitute a risk indicator rather than a risk factor for ASD, which is relevant for diagnostic and genetic counselling.
34982325|a|Adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are at a heightened risk for obesity. Family-level measures of nutrition and physical activity may help explain factors contributing to disproportionate rates of weight gain. Twenty adolescents with ASD participated in baseline testing for a study to assess the feasibility of remotely-delivered yoga. Parents completed the Family Nutrition and Physical Activity (FNPA) survey and anthropometrics and physical activity were assessed in the adolescents. A median split was applied to the FNPA score to create high and low obesogenic environments and nonparametric O'Brien's multiple endpoint tests were used to evaluate the differences. Between-group differences were found in anthropometrics (p = 0.01) but not physical activity (p = 0.72). Implications for a multifaceted family-based approach to obesity prevention are discussed.
34982324|a|Our purpose in this study was to examine the effects of an intervention package consisting of shared book reading and an adapted question-answer relationship (QAR) strategy comprised of visual supports and think-aloud scripts on listening comprehension in four preschool children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We used a single-subject concurrent multiple-baseline design across participants with continuous acquisition probes to evaluate the effects of the intervention package on producing acquisition and maintenance of listening comprehension across four types of comprehension questions. Visual analysis and Tau-U effect size indicated that the intervention package was effective in producing acquisition and maintenance of listening comprehension in preschool children with ASD. Directions for future research and clinical implications for early education practice are discussed.
34982323|a|In this qualitative study, we aimed to explore the challenges of providing services and supports for children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and their families from the perceptions of professionals and parents of children with ASD. We classified the results of the study into three key categories including shortcomings in the management of children with ASD; shortcomings of supportive programs and facilities for children with ASD and their families; and organizational challenges in providing services for these children. We analyzed data using the content analysis method. The results showed that there is a wide range of challenges in providing sufficient and high-quality services for children with ASD and empowerment programs for their parents.
34982108|a|
34982099|a|Importance: The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends referring children at elevated risk of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) for Part C early intervention (EI) services, but notes that EI services often fail to provide ASD screening. Objective: To evaluate the hypothesis that a multistage screening protocol for ASD implemented in 3 EI settings will increase autism detection, especially among Spanish-speaking families. Design, Setting, and Participants: Difference-in-differences analyses with propensity score weighting of a quasi-experimental design using administrative data on 3 implementation EI agencies and 9 comparison EI agencies from 2012 to 2018 provided by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health. Eligible children were aged 14 to 36 months, enrolled in EI, had no prior ASD diagnosis or medical condition precluding participation, and had parents who spoke English or Spanish. The final analytic sample included 33 326 unique patients assessed across 150 200 person-quarters. Exposures: Multistage ASD assessment protocol including ASD screening questionnaires, observational screener, and diagnostic evaluation. Main Outcomes and Measures: Increased incidence of ASD diagnoses as documented in Department of Public Health records and reductions in language-associated health care disparities. Results: Implementation of screening at 3 EI sites was associated with a significant increase in the rate of ASD diagnoses (incidence rate ratios [IRR], 1.6; 95% CI, 1.3-2.1; P < .001), representing an additional 8.1 diagnoses per 1000 children per quarter. Among Spanish-speaking families, screening was also associated with a significant increase in the rate of ASD diagnoses (IRR, 2.6; 95% CI, 1.6-4.3; P < .001), representing 15.4 additional diagnoses per 1000 children per quarter-a larger increase than for non-Spanish-speaking families (interaction IRR, 1.8; 95% CI, 1.0-3.1; P = .005). Exploratory analyses revealed that screening was associated with a larger increase in the rate of ASD diagnoses among boys (IRR, 1.8; 95% CI, 1.4-2.3; P < .001) than among girls (IRR, 1.1; 95% CI, 0.6-1.7; P = .84). Conclusions and Relevance: In this study, associations between increased rates of ASD diagnoses and reductions in disparities for Spanish-speaking households support the effectiveness of multistage screening in EI. This study provides a comprehensive evaluation of ASD screening in EI settings as well as a rigorous evaluation of ASD screening in any setting with a no-screening comparison condition. Given that the intervention included multiple components, mechanisms of action warrant further research, as do disparities by child sex.
34981774|a|Synaptic adhesion molecules are major organizers of the neuronal network and play a crucial role in the regulation of synapse development and maintenance in the brain. Synaptic adhesion-like molecules (SALMs) and leukocyte common antigen-related receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases (LAR-PTPs) are adhesion protein families with established synaptic function. Dysfunction of several synaptic adhesion molecules has been linked to cognitive disorders such as autism spectrum disorders and schizophrenia. A recent study of the binding and complex structure of SALM3 and PTPsigma using small-angle X-ray scattering revealed a 2:2 complex similar to that observed for the interaction of human SALM5 and PTPdelta. However, the molecular structure of the SALM3-PTPsigma complex remains to be determined beyond the small-angle X-ray scattering model. Here, the expression, purification, crystallization and initial 6.5 A resolution structure of the mouse SALM3-PTPsigma complex are reported, which further verifies the formation of a 2:2 trans-heterotetrameric complex similar to the crystal structure of human SALM5-PTPdelta and validates the architecture of the previously reported small-angle scattering-based solution structure of the SALM3-PTPsigma complex. Details of the protein expression and purification, crystal optimization trials, and the initial structure solution and data analysis are provided.
34981677|a|BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to estimate the 8-year prevalence and mortality statistics of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) according to birth year (2002-2012). METHODS: We used the National Health Insurance Service database with 4,989,351 children born from 2002 to 2012 including 35,529 children diagnosed with ASD until 8 years of age. The 8-year cumulative prevalence of ASD was calculated annually (2010-2020) with 8 years of follow-up. The 8-year mortality was estimated using Cox models adjusted for sex, household income, area of residence, and year of birth. RESULTS: Of the 473,494 children born in 2002, 2,467 (5.2 per 1,000 births) were diagnosed with ASD until 2010. The ASD prevalence was 2.6 times higher among boys (1,839; 7.4 per 1,000 boy births) than girls (628; 2.8 per 1,000 girl births). Of the 467,360 children born in 2012, 4,378 (9.4 per 1,000 births) were diagnosed with ASD until 2020. The ASD prevalence was 2.7 times higher among boys (3,246; 13.5 per 1,000 boy births) than girls (1,132; 5.0 per 1,000 girl births). The risk of all-cause mortality was higher among children with ASD than those without (hazard ratio [HR], 2.340; 95% confidence interval [CI], 2.063-2.654), which is substantially higher among girls (HR, 4.223; 95% CI, 3.472-5.135) than boys (HR, 1.774; 95% CI, 1.505-2.090). CONCLUSION: The present study demonstrated that national-level prevalence and mortality statistics of ASD can be estimated effectively using claims data comprising newborns born each year and followed up for to the age of interest. Because this information is essential to establish evidence-based policies, health authorities need to consider producing epidemiological information of ASD continuously using the same methodology.
34981645|a|
34981308|a|This paper describes a process to define a comprehensive list of exemplars for seven core Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) diagnostic criteria for autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and report on interrater reliability in applying these exemplars to determine ASD case classification. Clinicians completed an iterative process to map specific exemplars from the CDC Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring (ADDM) Network criteria for ASD surveillance, DSM-5 text, and diagnostic assessments to each of the core DSM-5 ASD criteria. Clinicians applied the diagnostic exemplars to child behavioral descriptions in existing evaluation records to establish initial reliability standards and then for blinded clinician review in one site (phase 1) and for two ADDM Network surveillance years (phase 2). Interrater reliability for each of the DSM-5 diagnostic categories and overall ASD classification was high (defined as very good .60-.79 to excellent >= .80 Kappa values) across sex, race/ethnicity, and cognitive levels for both phases. Classification of DSM-5 ASD by mapping specific exemplars from evaluation records by a diverse group of clinician raters is feasible and reliable. This framework provides confidence in the consistency of prevalence classifications of ASD and may be further applied to improve consistency of ASD diagnoses in clinical settings.
34981125|a|BACKGROUND: Pediatric brain tumor survivors (PBTS) are at risk of experiencing social competence challenges, but only a limited number of studies have used a qualitative approach to understand their social relationships. We examined PBTS responses to social interview questions within the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule, 2nd edition (ADOS-2), which includes questions related to their understanding of their own relationships, as well as the construct of friendship more generally. METHODS: Twenty-four PBTS (ages 9-17 years; M = 14.2 years from diagnosis; 50% male; 42% received radiation treatment) completed the ADOS-2. ADOS-2 social interview responses were recorded and transcribed verbatim. Themes were derived using an inductive thematic analysis approach. RESULTS: PBTS reported that they considered trust, acceptance, respect, emotional support, and spending time together to be important aspects of friendships in general. When describing their own social relationships, some PBTS noted a lack of intimacy or closeness, spending time with their friends almost exclusively at school, with structured activities outside of school being an additional basis for friendship. Challenges to their social relationships included loneliness and reliance on family for social support, experiences of teasing and bullying, social skills deficits, and lack of insight into social situations. CONCLUSION: Although PBTS were able to acknowledge many important qualities of friendships in general (e.g., trust, emotional support), these were not necessarily reported in their own friendships. PBTS also appeared to have difficulty identifying whether someone was their friend. These findings offer potential opportunities for supporting PBTS in achieving friendships consistent with their conception of this important relationship.
34980898|a|Affective speech, including motherese, captures an infant's attention and enhances social, language and emotional development. Decreased behavioural response to affective speech and reduced caregiver-child interactions are early signs of autism in infants. To understand this, we measured neural responses to mild affect speech, moderate affect speech and motherese using natural sleep functional magnetic resonance imaging and behavioural preference for motherese using eye tracking in typically developing toddlers and those with autism. By combining diverse neural-clinical data using similarity network fusion, we discovered four distinct clusters of toddlers. The autism cluster with the weakest superior temporal responses to affective speech and very poor social and language abilities had reduced behavioural preference for motherese, while the typically developing cluster with the strongest superior temporal response to affective speech showed the opposite effect. We conclude that significantly reduced behavioural preference for motherese in autism is related to impaired development of temporal cortical systems that normally respond to parental affective speech.
34980886|a|Various single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the oxytocin receptor (OXTR) gene have been associated with behavioral traits, autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and other diseases. The non-synonymous SNP rs4686302 results in the OXTR variant A218T and has been linked to core characteristics of ASD, trait empathy and preterm birth. However, the molecular and intracellular mechanisms underlying those associations are still elusive. Here, we uncovered the molecular and intracellular consequences of this mutation that may affect the psychological or behavioral outcome of oxytocin (OXT)-treatment regimens in clinical studies, and provide a mechanistic explanation for an altered receptor function. We created two monoclonal HEK293 cell lines, stably expressing either the wild-type or A218T OXTR. We detected an increased OXTR protein stability, accompanied by a shift in Ca2+ dynamics and reduced MAPK pathway activation in the A218T cells. Combined whole-genome and RNA sequencing analyses in OXT-treated cells revealed 7823 differentially regulated genes in A218T compared to wild-type cells, including 429 genes being associated with ASD. Furthermore, computational modeling provided a molecular basis for the observed change in OXTR stability suggesting that the OXTR mutation affects downstream events by altering receptor activation and signaling, in agreement with our in vitro results. In summary, our study provides the cellular mechanism that links the OXTR rs4686302 SNP with genetic dysregulations associated with aspects of ASD.
34980259|a|BACKGROUND: Dravet Syndrome is a severe childhood pharmaco-resistant epileptic disorder mainly caused by mutations in the SCN1A gene, which encodes for the alpha1 subunit of the type I voltage-gated sodium channel (NaV1.1), that causes imbalance between excitation and inhibition in the brain. We recently found that eEF2K knock out mice displayed enhanced GABAergic transmission and tonic inhibition and were less susceptible to epileptic seizures. Thus, we investigated the effect of inhibition of eEF2K on the epileptic and behavioral phenotype of Scn1a +- mice, a murine model of Dravet Syndrome. METHODS: To elucidate the role of eEF2K pathway in the etiopathology of Dravet syndrome we generated a new mouse model deleting the eEF2K gene in Scn1a +- mice. By crossing Scn1a +- mice with eEF2K-/- mice we obtained the three main genotypes needed for our studies, Scn1a+/+ eEF2K+/+ (WT mice), Scn1a +- eEF2K+/+ mice (Scn1a +- mice) and Scn1a +- eEF2K-/- mice, that were fully characterized for EEG and behavioral phenotype. Furthermore, we tested the ability of a pharmacological inhibitor of eEF2K in rescuing EEG alterations of the Scn1a +- mice. RESULTS: We showed that the activity of eEF2K/eEF2 pathway was enhanced in Scn1a +- mice. Then, we demonstrated that both genetic deletion and pharmacological inhibition of eEF2K were sufficient to ameliorate the epileptic phenotype of Scn1a +- mice. Interestingly we also found that motor coordination defect, memory impairments, and stereotyped behavior of the Scn1a +- mice were reverted by eEF2K deletion. The analysis of spontaneous inhibitory postsynaptic currents (sIPSCs) suggested that the rescue of the pathological phenotype was driven by the potentiation of GABAergic synapses. LIMITATIONS: Even if we found that eEF2K deletion was able to increase inhibitory synapses function, the molecular mechanism underlining the inhibition of eEF2K/eEF2 pathway in rescuing epileptic and behavioral alterations in the Scn1a +- needs further investigations. CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that pharmacological inhibition of eEF2K could represent a novel therapeutic intervention for treating epilepsy and related comorbidities in the Dravet syndrome.
34980240|a|BACKGROUND: Autism screening is recommended at 18- and 24-month pediatric well visits. The Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers-Revised (M-CHAT-R) authors recommend a follow-up interview (M-CHAT-R/F) when positive. M-CHAT-R/F may be less accurate for 18-month-olds than 24-month-olds and accuracy for identification prior to two years is not known in samples that include children screening negative. Since autism symptoms may emerge gradually, ordinally scoring items based on the full range of response options, such as in the 10-item version of the Quantitative Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (Q-CHAT-10), might better capture autism signs than the dichotomous (i.e., yes/no) items in M-CHAT-R or the pass/fail scoring of Q-CHAT-10 items. The aims of this study were to determine and compare the accuracy of the M-CHAT-R/F and the Q-CHAT-10 and to describe the accuracy of the ordinally scored Q-CHAT-10 (Q-CHAT-10-O) for predicting autism in a sample of children who were screened at 18 months. METHODS: This is a community pediatrics validation study with screen positive (n = 167) and age- and practice-matched screen negative children (n = 241) recruited for diagnostic evaluations completed prior to 2 years old. Clinical diagnosis of autism was based on results of in-person diagnostic autism evaluations by research reliable testers blind to screening results and using the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule-Second Edition (ADOS-2) Toddler Module and Mullen Scales of Early Learning (MSEL) per standard guidelines. RESULTS: While the M-CHAT-R/F had higher specificity and PPV compared to M-CHAT-R, Q-CHAT-10-O showed higher sensitivity than M-CHAT-R/F and Q-CHAT-10. LIMITATIONS: Many parents declined participation and the sample is over-represented by higher educated parents. Results cannot be extended to older ages. CONCLUSIONS: Limitations of the currently recommended two-stage M-CHAT-R/F at the 18-month visit include low sensitivity with minimal balancing benefit of improved PPV from the follow-up interview. Ordinal, rather than dichotomous, scoring of autism screening items appears to be beneficial at this age. The Q-CHAT-10-O with ordinal scoring shows advantages to M-CHAT-R/F with half the number of items, no requirement for a follow-up interview, and improved sensitivity. Yet, Q-CHAT-10-O sensitivity is less than M-CHAT-R (without follow-up) and specificity is less than the two-stage procedure. Such limitations are consistent with recognition that screening needs to recur beyond this age.
34980074|a|BACKGROUND: The prevalence of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has increased rapidly in recent years. Environmental factors may play an important role in the pathogenesis of ASD. These factors may include socioeconomic factors, nutritional factors, heavy metal exposure, air pollution, etc. Our aim is to analyze possible environmental factors associated with the severity of ASD. METHODS: All participating children were divided into two groups (mild and moderate/severe) according to the severity of their symptoms, as determined by their Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) scores. The socioeconomic, demographic factors and the nutritional factors that may affect the severity of ASD were included in the logistic regression to analyze whether they were predictors that affected the severity of ASD. RESULTS: Logistic regression showed that caregivers(P = 0.042), maternal education (P = 0.030), gastrointestinal problems (P = 0.041) and a high serum concentration of lead (P = 0.003) were statistically significantly associated with ASD severity. CONCLUSION: Many environmental factors affect the severity of ASD. We concluded that non-parental caregivers, low maternal education, gastrointestinal problems and high blood lead level maybe predictors that affected the severity of ASD in northeast China.
34979592|a|The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) proposed the Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) initiative as an alternate way to organize research of mental illnesses, by looking at dimensions of functioning rather than being tied to categorical diagnoses. This paper briefly discusses the motivation for and organization of RDoC, and then explores the NIMH portfolio and recent work to monitor the utility and progress that RDoC has afforded developmental research. To examine how RDoC has influenced the NIMH developmental research portfolio over the last decade, we employed a natural language processing algorithm to identify the number of developmental science grants classified as incorporating an RDoC approach. Additional portfolio analyses examine temporal trends in funded RDoC-relevant grants, publications and citations, and research training opportunities. Reflecting on how RDoC has influenced the focus of grant applications, we highlight examples from research on Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), childhood irritability, and Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Lastly, we consider how the dimensional and transdiagnostic approaches emphasized in RDoC have facilitated research on personalized intervention for heterogeneous disorders and preventive/early interventions targeting emergent or subthreshold psychopathology.
34979433|a|Increasing evidence suggests that cortical folding patterns of human cerebral cortex manifest overt structural and functional differences. However, for interpretability, few studies leverage advanced techniques (e.g., deep learning) to investigate the difference among cortical folds, resulting in more differences yet to be extensively explored. To this end, we proposed an effective topology-preserving transfer learning framework to differentiate cortical fMRI time series extracted from cortical folds. Our framework consists of three main parts: (1) Neural architecture search (NAS), which is used to devise a well-performing network structure based on an initialized hand-designed super-graph in an image dataset; (2) Topology-preserving transfer, which takes the model searched by NAS as the source network, keeping the topological connectivity in the network unchanged, while transforming all 2D operations including convolution and pooling into 1D, therefore resulting in a topology-preserving network, named TPNAS-Net; (3) Classification and correlation analysis, which involves using the TPNAS-Net to classify 1D cortical fMRI time series for each individual brain, and performing a group difference analysis between autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and healthy control (HC) and correlation analysis with clinical information (i.e., age). Extensive experiments on two ASD datasets obtain consistent results, demonstrating that the TPNAS-Net not only discriminates cortical folding patterns at high classification accuracy, but also captures subtle differences between ASD and HC (p-value = 0.042). In addition, we discover that there is a positive correlation between the classification accuracy and age in ASD (r = 0.39, p-value = 0.04). These findings together suggest that structural and functional differences in cortical folding patterns between ASD and HC may provide a potentially useful biomarker for the diagnosis of ASD.
34979379|a|Several studies have shown that obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), eating disorders (ED), autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) share obsessive-compulsive (OC) symptoms and often co-occur, which could be seen as indicative of a common etiological basis. In addition, they also appear to have similarities in executive functioning. The present study investigated disorder-specific symptoms and executive functioning as a possible joint factor in individuals with OCD (n=53), BDD (n=95), ED (n=171) and ASD (n=73), and in healthy controls (n=110). The participants completed online questionnaires measuring OCD, ED, ASD and BDD related symptoms as well as executive functioning. The clinical groups were first compared to the healthy controls. Subsequently, a network analysis was performed only with the OC-groups. This network approach assumes that psychopathological disorders are the result of causal symptom interactions. As expected, the healthy controls reported less severe symptoms compared to the OC patient groups. The network analysis suggested that the executive functioning skill set shifting/attention switching and the ASD symptoms, social and communication skills were the most central nodes in the model. Difficulty with cognitive flexibility and social factors are central in OC-spectrum disorders and may be perpetuating factors and thus a relevant focus of treatment.
34979037|a|This study analyzed narratives of male and female adolescents with fragile X syndrome (FXS). The impact of structural language, cognition and autism symptomatology on narrative skills and the association between narratives and literacy were examined. Narratives from 32 adolescents with FXS (24 males, 8 females) were analyzed for macrostructure. Relationships between narrative macrostructure, language scores, cognitive scores, Childhood Autism Rating Scale-Second Edition scores and literacy skills were examined. Males produced more simplistic narratives, whereas the females' narratives were more complex. Language scores predicted narrative scores above and beyond nonverbal cognitive skills and autism symptomatology. Narrative scores correlated with literacy scores. Narrative skills in FXS are predicted by language skills and are correlated with literacy skills. Investigation into narrative interventions in FXS is needed.
34979036|a|By adulthood, most males with fragile X syndrome (FXS) require support to navigate day-to-day settings. The present study cross-sectionally: (1) characterized the profile of daily living skills in males with FXS and (2) examined associated participant characteristics (i.e., fragile X mental retardation protein [FMRP] expression, nonverbal cognition, language, autism symptomatology, and anxiety symptomatology) using the Waisman-Activities of Daily Living questionnaire. Males with FXS (n = 57, ages 15-23 years) needed more help/support in the areas of domestic and community daily livings skills, than in the area of personal daily living skills. Significant associations were observed between reduced daily living skills and lower nonverbal cognition, receptive language, expressive language, and increased autism symptomatology. Receptive language emerged as the strongest unique predictor of daily living skill performance.
34979035|a|The purpose of this study was to assess the quality of educational programs for school-aged children with autism in the United States. Investigators completed the Autism Program Environment Quality Rating Systems-Preschool/Elementary (APERS-PE) in 60 elementary schools enrolling children with autism. The mean total rating scores were near the midpoint rating, indicating schools were providing educational program environments classified as adequate but not of high quality. Domains of the APERS-PE reflecting structural quality tended to be significantly above average and domains reflecting process quality tended to be significantly below average. With a few exceptions, inclusive and special education program did not differ significantly in total program quality ratings and reflected the same pattern of domain quality ratings.
34979034|a|Parents of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) face challenges in accessing diagnostic and treatment services; these challenges vary by race, ethnicity, and culture. This systematic review examines parental perceptions of ASD within Latinx and Black American communities. Findings indicate that interconnections with family and religious groups promoted positive coping and describe positive impacts of having a child with ASD. Relative to White families, community members reported reduced access to information and more inaccurate beliefs about ASD, higher levels of ASD-related stigma, and more negative experiences with healthcare providers, which serve to exacerbate healthcare disparities. Conclusions are limited by an underrepresentation of minority groups in research. We call for efforts to address the specific needs of racial and ethnic minorities.
34978335|a|Intraverbal tacts are an example of multiply controlled verbal behavior. More specifically, they are verbal responses under control of both a nonverbal (visual) stimulus (e.g., a green ball) and a verbal (auditory) stimulus (e.g., "What color?" vs. "What shape?"). Studies have shown that verbal behavior training can be arranged in a way that would lead to the emergence of other verbal operants, including multiply controlled (convergent) intraverbals. Our study sought to evaluate the relevance of a specific set of component skills on the emergence of intraverbal tacts in children with an autism spectrum disorder. Intraverbal tacts were observed only when all component skills were mastered, suggesting that this set of skills was sufficient to produce emergent verbal performance. Preliminary data were obtained on the necessity of 4 of the 6 component skills and tentatively suggest that they may be necessary to produce emergent intraverbal tacts, at least under some conditions.
34978294|a|Demyelination has been identified in not only multiple sclerosis (MS), but also other central nervous system diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and autism. As evidence suggests that remyelination can effectively ameliorate the disease symptoms, there is an increasing focus on drug development to promote the myelin regeneration process. Thus, a region-selectable and result-reliable drug delivery technique is required to test the efficiency and specificity of these drugs in vivo. This protocol introduces the osmotic pump implant as a new drug delivery approach in the lysolecithin-induced demyelination mouse model. The osmotic pump is a small implantable device that can bypass the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and deliver drugs steadily and directly to specific areas of the mouse brain. It can also effectively improve the bioavailability of drugs such as peptides and proteins with a short half-life. Therefore, this method is of great value to the field of central nervous system myelin regeneration research.
34978084|a|Gene and protein expression of BTBR T+ Itpr3tf /J (BTBR) mice with autistic-like behaviours were compared with the C57BL/6J strain, which is considered to have normal immunity and behaviour. Notch signalling pathway was constitutively activated in the immune system and liver of BTBR T+ Itpr3tf /J (BTBR) mice. Notch ligand 4 (Dll4), Notch receptors (Notch1 Notch2 and Notch3) and recombination signal binding protein for immunoglobulin kappa j region (RBPJ) were increased both at gene and protein levels in BTBR spleens and thymi. Notch downstream transcriptional factors, Tbx21, Gata3, Rorc and FoxP3 were increased in BTBR spleens, Gata3 and FoxP3 were increased in BTBR thymi and BTBR mice have a high blood CD4/CD8 T cell ratio. Reduced nucleotide excision repair ability in BTBR spleens was associated with increased 8-oxoguanine, Ogg1 inhibition, an enhanced level of apoptotic thymocytes and higher expression of GATA-3. Ogg1 inhibition and enhanced GATA-3 expression also were detected in BTBR brain. Notch signal promoted mitochondrial dynamics switching to enhanced fission with an increased number and mass of mitochondria in immune cells of BTBR mice, but not in livers and brains. Constitutive influences on mitochondria exist in this mouse model of autism spectrum disorder; similar outcomes from environmental exposures might occur perinatally in susceptible individuals to affect the development of autism.
34978061|a|We saw a 60-year-old male veterinarian with a history of autism spectrum disorder, major depressive disorder, and suicidality. He had been treated with more than 15 psychotropic medications, was admitted to inpatient care several times, and attempted suicide once. His current complaints included a decline in social functioning, repetitive behaviour, sensory hypersensitivity, anxiety, low mood, anhedonia, lack of energy, and chronic suicidality. His last medication consisted of risperidone and valproic acid. Despite intensive treatment, he remained impaired by his complaints and could not return to work. After self-medication with ketamine, he reported that his depressive and suicidal complaints disappeared and that his autism-related complaints diminished. This case - together with previous clinical research - suggests that ketamine is likely to be effective against depression and suicidality, that ketamine is potentially effective against autism-related symptoms, and that increasing awareness of the beneficial effects of ketamine can lead to unsupervised, and therefore risky, use of ketamine as a form of self-medication.
34978025|a|As autism is an invisible and often stigmatised condition, disclosing the diagnosis may lead to both support and/or discrimination. This mixed-methods questionnaire study examined autistic adults' experiences of disclosure in various contexts. The sample consisted of 393 participants aged 17-83 years from two longitudinal surveys. Almost all participants disclosed their diagnosis to someone, most commonly to friends. A significant minority of participants studying and/or working at the time had not disclosed to their education provider/employer. Content analysis of open-ended responses showed participants desired to gain understanding and support from disclosure but feared prejudice. While some received support, others encountered dismissiveness and misunderstanding. Findings highlight the need to improve autism understanding and reduce stigma within and beyond educational and employment contexts.
34977462|a|The current study investigates whether the types of pronominal errors children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) make are different from those of their TD peers at similar stages of language development. A recent review about language acquisition in ASD argues that these children show relative deficits in assigning/extending lexical meaning alongside relative strengths in morpho-syntax (Naigles & Tek, 2017). Pronouns provide an ideal test case for this argument because they are marked both for grammatical features (case) and features that reflect qualities of the referent itself (gender and number) or the referent's role in conversation (person). The form-meaning hypothesis predicts that children with ASD should struggle more with these latter features. The current study tests this hypothesis with data from a caregiver report, completed by caregivers of 151 children with and without ASD. Reported pronominal errors were categorized as meaning or form and compared across groups. In accordance with the form-meaning hypothesis, a higher proportion of children with ASD make meaning errors than they do form errors, and significantly more of them make meaning errors than TD children do.
34976896|a|Early intervention programs positively affect key behaviors for children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, most of these programs do not target children with severe autistic symptomatology associated with intellectual disability (ID). This study aimed to investigate the psychological and clinical outcomes of children with severe autism and ID enrolled in the Tailored and Inclusive Program for Autism-Tours (TIPA-T). The first step of the TIPA-T is the Exchange and Development Therapy (EDT): an individual neurofunctional intervention consisting of one-to-one exchanges between a child and a therapist taking place in a pared-down environment. It aims to rehabilitate psychophysiological abilities at the roots of social communication through structured sequences of "social play." Cognitive and socio-emotional skills and general development were evaluated with the Social Cognitive Evaluation Battery scale and the Brunet-Lezine Scale-Revised, respectively, before and after 9 months of intervention in 32 children with ASD and ID. Autistic symptomatology was evaluated with the Behavior Summarized Evaluation-Revised scale at five time-points in a subset of 14 children, both in individual and group settings. Statistically significant post-intervention improvements were found in cognitive and socio-emotional skills. All but one child showed improvements in at least one social domain, and 78% of children gained one level in at least four social domains. Twenty-nine children improved in cognitive domains, with 66% of children improving in at least three cognitive domains. Autistic symptomatology evaluated in one-to-one settings significantly decreased with therapy; this reduction was observed in more than 85% of children. In group settings, autistic symptomatology also decreased in more than 60% of children. Global developmental age significantly increased by 3.8 months. The TIPA-T, including EDT in particular, improves socio-emotional skills of most children with ASD and reduces autistic symptomatology, yet with heterogeneous outcomes profiles, in line with the strong heterogeneity of profiles observed in ASD. At the group level, this study highlights the benefits of the TIPA-T for children with severe autism and associated ID. Assessment of autistic core symptoms showed an improvement of social interaction, both in one-to-one and group evaluations, demonstrating the generalizability of the skills learned during the EDT.
34976244|a|Introduction: A common comorbidity in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) children is gastrointestinal problems, and a possible link between active gastrointestinal inflammation and autism has been suggested. Faecal calprotectin (FC) is a non-invasive marker for of gastrointestinal inflammation. Aim: To study the level of FC as a marker of bowel inflammation in children with ASD and its possible relation to gastrointestinal manifestations. Material and methods: Calprotectin levels were assessed in stool samples of 40 ASD children. Autism severity was assessed by the Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS). Severity of gastrointestinal symptoms was assessed using a modified version of the 6-Item Gastrointestinal Severity Index (6-GSI) questionnaire. A control group of 40 healthy children matched for age and sex with the cases was also included to compare their levels of FC. Results: Gastrointestinal symptoms were present in 82.5% of children with autism; the most reported offensive stool odour (70%) and the least diarrhoea (17.5%), and a high 6-GSI score was observed in 35% of ASD children. FC levels were elevated in 35% of the cases and in 25% of the control group. The mean levels of FC of cases were significantly elevated compared to levels of controls. FC levels positively correlated with severity of gastrointestinal symptoms (6-GSI) in autistic patients. There was positive correlation between CARS and 6-GSI. Conclusions: Gastrointestinal manifestations are a common comorbidity in autistic patients. ASD patients have significantly higher FC levels than healthy controls. FC levels are strongly correlated with the severity of gastrointestinal manifestations in ASD children. So, gastrointestinal manifestations among autistic patients could be caused by gastrointestinal inflammation.
34976023|a|Early-Onset Schizophrenia (EOS) is a very rare mental disorder that is a form of schizophrenia occurring before the age of 18. EOS is a brain disease marked by an early onset of positive and negative symptoms of psychosis that impact development and cognitive functioning. Clinical manifestations commonly include premorbid features of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), attention deficits, Intellectual Disability (ID), neurodevelopmental delay, and behavioral disturbances. After the onset of psychotic symptoms, other neuropsychiatric comorbidities are also common, including obsessive-compulsive disorder, major depressive disorder, expressive and receptive language disorders, auditory processing, and executive functioning deficits. With the purpose to better gain insight into the genetic bases of this disorder, we developed a pilot project performing whole exome sequencing of nine trios affected by EOS, ASD, and mild ID. We carried out gene prioritization by combining multiple bioinformatic tools allowing us to identify the main pathways that could underpin the neurodevelopmental phenotypes of these patients. We identified the presence of variants in genes belonging to the Wnt, cadherin and cholecystokinin receptor signaling pathways.
34975638|a|Following decreasing vaccination rates over the last two decades, understanding the roots of vaccine hesitancy has become a public health priority. Vaccine hesitancy is linked to scientifically unfounded fears around the MMR vaccine and autism which are often fuelled by misinformation spread on social media. To counteract the effects of misinformation about vaccines and in particular the falling vaccination rates, much research has focused on identifying the antecedents of vaccine hesitancy. As antecedents of vaccine hesitancy are contextually dependent, a one-size-fits-all approach is unlikely to be successful in non-WEIRD (Western, Educated, Industrialised, Rich, and Democratic) populations, and even in certain (non-typical) WEIRD sub-populations. Successful interventions to reduce vaccine hesitancy must be based on understanding of the specific context. To identify potential contextual differences in the antecedents of vaccine hesitancy, we review research from three non-WEIRD populations in East Asia, and three WEIRD sub-populations. We find that regardless of the context, mistrust seems to be the key factor leading to vaccine hesitancy. However, the object of mistrust varies across WEIRD and non-WEIRD populations, and across WEIRD subgroups suggesting that effective science communication must be mindful of these differences.
34975585|a|Background and Objective: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) refers to a heterogeneous set of neurodevelopmental disorders with diverse symptom severity and comorbidities. Although alterations in gut microbiota have been reported in individuals with ASD, it remains unclear whether certain microbial pattern is linked to specific symptom or comorbidity in ASD. We aimed to investigate the associations between gut microbiota and the severity of social impairment and cognitive functioning in children with ASD. Methods: A total of 261 age-matched children, including 138 children diagnosed with ASD, 63 with developmental delay or intellectual disability (DD/ID), and 60 typically developing (TD) children, were enrolled from the Shanghai Xinhua Registry. The children with ASD were further classified into two subgroups: 76 children diagnosed with ASD and developmental disorder (ASD+DD) and 62 with ASD only (ASD-only). The gut microbiome of all children was profiled and evaluated by 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing. Results: The gut microbial analyses demonstrated an altered microbial community structure in children with ASD. The alpha diversity indices of the ASD+DD and ASD-only subgroups were significantly lower than the DD/ID or TD groups. At the genus level, we observed a decrease in the relative abundance of Prevotella. Simultaneously, Bacteroides and Faecalibacterium were significantly increased in ASD compared with DD/ID and TD participants. There was a clear correlation between alpha diversity and the Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) total score for all participants, and this correlation was independent of IQ performance. Similar correlations with the CARS total score were observed for genera Bacteroides, Faecalibacterium, and Oscillospira. However, there was no single genus significantly associated with IQ in all participants. Conclusions: Specific alterations in bacterial taxonomic composition and associations with the severity of social impairment and IQ performance were observed in children with ASD or ASD subgroups, when compared with DD/ID or TD groups. These results illustrate that gut microbiota may serve as a promising biomarker for ASD symptoms. Nevertheless, further investigations are warranted.
34975582|a|As the rates of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) increase and early screening efforts intensify, more toddlers with high likelihood of ASD are entering the United States' (US') publicly funded early intervention system. Early intervention service delivery for toddlers with ASD varies greatly based on state resources and regulations. Research recommends beginning ASD-specific evidence-based practices (EBP), especially caregiver-implemented intervention, as early as possible to facilitate the development of social-communication skills and general learning. Translating EBP into practice has been challenging, especially in low-resourced areas. The main goal of this study was to obtain a more comprehensive understanding of public early intervention system structure, service delivery practices, and factors influencing EBP use for children with ASD in the US. Participants (N = 133) included 8 early intervention state coordinators in 7 states, 29 agency administrators in those states, 57 early intervention providers from those agencies, and 39 caregivers of children with ASD receiving services from those providers. Online surveys gathered stakeholder and caregiver perspectives on early intervention services as well as organizational factors related to EBP implementation climate and culture. Stakeholders identified key intervention needs for young children with ASD. In general, both agency administrators and direct providers reported feeling somewhat effective or very effective in addressing most needs of children with ASD. They reported the most difficulty addressing eating, sleeping, family stress, and stereotyped behaviors. Data indicate that children from families with higher income received significantly higher service intensity. While administrators and providers reported high rates of high-quality caregiver coaching (>60%), caregivers reported low rates (23%). Direct providers with more favorable attitudes toward EBP had greater EBP use. In turn, provider attitudes toward EBP were significantly associated with implementation leadership and culture at their agency. Results suggest that publicly funded early intervention programs in the US require additional resources and training for providers and leaders to support improved implementation climate and attitudes toward ASD EBPs. Results also suggest that more state system support is needed to increase use of ASD-specific EBP use, including high-quality caregiver coaching, to better serve toddlers with ASD. Recommendations for implementation strategies are addressed.
34975577|a|Background: Recent studies have reported changes in the electroencephalograms (EEG) of patients with major depressive disorder (MDD). However, little research has explored EEG differences between adolescents with MDD and healthy controls, particularly EEG microstates differences. The aim of the current study was to characterize EEG microstate activity in adolescents with MDD and healthy controls (HCs). Methods: A total of 35 adolescents with MDD and 35 HCs were recruited in this study. The depressive symptoms were assessed by Hamilton Depression Scale (HAMD) and Children's Depression Inventory (CDI), and the anxiety symptoms were assessed by Chinese version of DSM-5 Level 2-Anxiety-Child scale. A 64-channel EEG was recorded for 5 min (eye closed, resting-state) and analyzed using microstate analysis. Microstate properties were compared between groups and correlated with patients' depression scores. Results: We found increased occurrence and contribution of microstate B in MDD patients compared to HCs, and decreased occurrence and contribution of microstate D in MDD patients compared to HCs. While no significant correlation between depression severity (HAMD score) and the microstate metrics (occurrence and contribution of microstate B and D) differing between MDD adolescents and HCs was found. Conclusions: Adolescents with MDD showed microstate B and microstate D changes. The obtained results may deepen our understanding of dynamic EEG changes among adolescents with MDD and provide some evidence of changes in brain development in adolescents with MDD.
34975576|a|The concept of "acquired autism" refers to the hypothesis that amongst the massive heterogeneity that encompasses autism spectrum disorder (ASD) there may be several phenotypes that are neither syndromic nor innate. Strong and consistent evidence has linked exposure to various pharmacological and infective agents with an elevated risk of a diagnosis of ASD including maternal valproate use, rubella and herpes encephalitis. Autoimmune encephalitis (AE) describes a group of conditions characterised by the body's immune system mounting an attack on healthy brain cells causing brain inflammation. The resultant cognitive, psychiatric and neurological symptoms that follow AE have also included ASD or autism-like traits and states. We review the current literature on AE and ASD. Drawing also on associated literature on autoimmune psychosis (AP) and preliminary evidence of a psychosis-linked subtype of ASD, we conclude that AE may either act as a potentially causative agent for ASD, and/or produce symptoms that could easily be mistaken for or misdiagnosed as autism. Further studies are required to discern the connection between AE and autism. Where autism is accompanied by regression and atypical onset patterns, it may be prudent to investigate whether a differential diagnosis of AE would be more appropriate.
34975557|a|Deficits in empathy have been considered hallmarks in individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) but are also considered to underlie antisocial behaviour associated with individuals with callous unemotional traits (CU). Research has suggested that individuals with autism spectrum disorders show more difficulties with cognitive empathy, and that individuals diagnosed with behaviours difficulties, characterised by CU traits and antisocial behaviour, demonstrate low affective empathy. In the current manuscript we present findings of two studies. The first study describes the validation of a new stimulus set developed for the empathic accuracy task, focused on its cognitive component. The second study compares the performance of 27 adolescents with ASD, 27 age matched typically developing adolescents and 17 adolescents with behavioural difficulties on the empathic accuracy task and a self-report measure of empathy. While, no differences were observed between the three groups across the empathy accuracy task, the adolescents with ASD and CD showed deficits in their cognitive empathy across the self-report measure. Adolescents with ASD showed lower scores in particularly their perspective taking abilities, whereas the adolescences with behavioural difficulties showed more difficulties with their online simulation. No differences in self-reported affective empathy across the three groups were observed. Clinical implications of the findings are discussed.
34975438|a|Prevailing theories of the neural basis of at least a subset of individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) include an imbalance of excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission. These circuitry imbalances are commonly probed in adults using auditory steady-state responses (ASSR, driven at 40 Hz) to elicit coherent electrophysiological responses (EEG/MEG) from intact circuitry. Challenges to the ASSR methodology occur during development, where the optimal ASSR driving frequency may be unknown. An alternative approach (more agnostic to driving frequency) is the amplitude-modulated (AM) sweep in which the amplitude of a tone (with carrier frequency 500 Hz) is modulated as a sweep from 10 to 100 Hz over the course of ~15 s. Phase synchrony of evoked responses, measured via intra-trial coherence, is recorded (by EEG or MEG) as a function of frequency. We applied such AM sweep stimuli bilaterally to 40 typically developing and 80 children with ASD, aged 6-18 years. Diagnoses were confirmed by DSM-5 criteria as well as autism diagnostic observation schedule (ADOS) observational assessment. Stimuli were presented binaurally during MEG recording and consisted of 20 AM swept stimuli (500 Hz carrier; sweep 10-100 Hz up and down) with a duration of ~30 s each. Peak intra-trial coherence values and peak response frequencies of source modeled responses (auditory cortex) were examined. First, the phase synchrony or inter-trial coherence (ITC) of the ASSR is diminished in ASD; second, hemispheric bias in the ASSR, observed in typical development (TD), is maintained in ASD, and third, that the frequency at which the peak response is obtained varies on an individual basis, in part dependent on age, and with altered developmental trajectories in ASD vs. TD. Finally, there appears an association between auditory steady-state phase synchrony (taken as a proxy of neuronal circuitry integrity) and clinical assessment of language ability/impairment. We concluded that (1) the AM sweep stimulus provides a mechanism for probing ASSR in an unbiased fashion, during developmental maturation of peak response frequency, (2) peak frequencies vary, in part due to developmental age, and importantly, (3) ITC at this peak frequency is diminished in ASD, with the degree of ITC disturbance related to clinically assessed language impairment.
34975423|a|Empirical evidence suggests that children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) show abnormal behavior during delay eyeblink conditioning. They show a higher conditioned response learning rate and earlier peak latency of the conditioned response signal. The neuronal mechanisms underlying this autistic behavioral phenotype are still unclear. Here, we use a physiologically constrained spiking neuron model of the cerebellar-cortical system to investigate which features are critical to explaining atypical learning in ASD. Significantly, the computer simulations run with the model suggest that the higher conditioned responses learning rate mainly depends on the reduced number of Purkinje cells. In contrast, the earlier peak latency mainly depends on the hyper-connections of the cerebellum with sensory and motor cortex. Notably, the model has been validated by reproducing the behavioral data collected from studies with real children. Overall, this article is a starting point to understanding the link between the behavioral and neurobiological basis in ASD learning. At the end of the paper, we discuss how this knowledge could be critical for devising new treatments.
34975368|a|Impaired cognitive flexibility has been repeatedly demonstrated in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). There is strong evidence for genetic involvement in ASD. First-degree relatives of individuals with ASD may show mild deficits in cognitive inflexibility. The present study investigated cognitive flexibility and its neuroelectrophysiological mechanisms in first-degree relatives of individuals with ASD to assess its potential familiality. Forty-five biological parents of individuals/children with ASD (pASD) and thirty-one biological parents of typically developing individuals/children (pTD), matched by gender, age, and IQ, were enrolled. The broad autism phenotype questionnaire (BAPQ) and cognitive flexibility inventory (CFI) were used to quantitatively assess autistic traits and cognitive flexibility in daily life, respectively. The task-switching paradigm was used to evaluate the behavioral flexibility in a structured assessment situation. Event-related potentials (ERPs) induced by this paradigm were also collected. Results showed that compared with the pTD group, the pASD group had lower CFI scores (t = -2.756, p < 0.01), while both groups showed an equivalent "switch cost" in the task-switching task (p > 0.05). Compared with the pTD group, the pASD group induced greater N2 amplitude at F3, F4, Fz, and C4 (F = 3.223, p < 0.05), while P3 amplitude and latency did not differ between the two groups. In addition, there was a significant negative correlation between the CFI total scores and BAPQ total scores in the pASD group (r = -0.734, p < 0.01). After controlling for age and IQ, the N2 amplitude in the frontal lobe of pASD was negatively correlated with the CFI total scores under the repetition sequence (r = -0.304, p = 0.053). These results indicated that pASD had deficit in cognitive flexibility at the self-reported and neurological levels. The cognitive flexibility difficulties of parents of children with ASD were related to autistic traits. These findings support that cognitive flexibility is most likely a neurocognitive endophenotype of ASD, which is worthy of further investigation.
34974949|a|INTRODUCTION: Cerebral creatine deficiency syndromes (CCDS) are a group of potentially treatable neurometabolic disorders. The clinical, genetic profile and follow up outcome of Indian CCDS patients is presented. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort of CCDS patients seen over six-years. Diagnosis was based either on low creatine peak on proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) and/or genetic evaluation. RESULTS: Thirteen patients were eligible [8 creatine transporter deficiency (CTD), 4 guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GAMT) deficiency and 1 could not be classified]. The mean (+-SD) age at diagnosis was 7.2(+-5.0) years. Clinical manifestations included intellectual disability (ID) with significant expressive speech delay in all. Most had significant behavior issues (8/13) and/or autism (8/13). All had history of convulsive seizures (11/13 had epilepsy; 2 patients only had febrile seizures) and 2/13 had movement disorder. Constipation was the commonest non-neurological manifestation (5/13 patients). Cranial MRI was normal in all CTD patients but showed globus pallidus hyperintensity in all four with GAMT deficiency. MRS performed in 11/13 patients, revealed abnormally low creatine peak. A causative genetic variant (novel mutation in nine) was identified in 12 patients. Three GAMT deficiency and one CTD patient reported neurodevelopmental improvement and good seizure control after creatine supplementation. CONCLUSION: Intellectual disability, disproportionate speech delay, autism, and epilepsy, were common in our CCDS patients. A normal structural neuroimaging with easily controlled febrile and/or afebrile seizures differentiated CTD from GAMT deficiency patients who had abnormal neuroimaging and often difficult to control epilepsy and movement disorder.
34974250|a|The field of adult neuroimaging relies on well-established principles in research design, imaging sequences, processing pipelines, as well as safety and data collection protocols. The field of infant magnetic resonance imaging, by comparison, is a young field with tremendous scientific potential but continuously evolving standards. The present article aims to initiate a constructive dialog between researchers who grapple with the challenges and inherent limitations of a nascent field and reviewers who evaluate their work. We address 20 questions that researchers commonly receive from research ethics boards, grant, and manuscript reviewers related to infant neuroimaging data collection, safety protocols, study planning, imaging sequences, decisions related to software and hardware, and data processing and sharing, while acknowledging both the accomplishments of the field and areas of much needed future advancements. This article reflects the cumulative knowledge of experts in the FIT'NG community and can act as a resource for both researchers and reviewers alike seeking a deeper understanding of the standards and tradeoffs involved in infant neuroimaging.
34974125|a|Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is one of the most studied neurotrophins in the mammalian brain, essential not only to the development of the central nervous system but also to synaptic plasticity. BDNF is present in various brain areas, but highest levels of expression are seen in the cerebellum and hippocampus. After birth, BDNF acts in the cerebellum as a mitogenic and chemotactic factor, stimulating the cerebellar granule cell precursors to proliferate, migrate and maturate, while in the hippocampus BDNF plays a fundamental role in synaptic transmission and plasticity, representing a key regulator for the long-term potentiation, learning and memory. Furthermore, the expression of BDNF is highly regulated and changes of its expression are associated with both physiological and pathological conditions. The purpose of this review is to provide an overview of the current state of knowledge on the BDNF biology and its neurotrophic role in the proper development and functioning of neurons and synapses in two important brain areas of postnatal neurogenesis, the cerebellum and hippocampus. Dysregulation of BDNF expression and signaling, resulting in alterations in neuronal maturation and plasticity in both systems, is a common hallmark of several neurodevelopmental diseases, such as autism spectrum disorder, suggesting that neuronal malfunction present in these disorders is the result of excessive or reduced of BDNF support. We believe that the more the relevance of the pathophysiological actions of BDNF, and its downstream signals, in early postnatal development will be highlighted, the more likely it is that new neuroprotective therapeutic strategies will be identified in the treatment of various neurodevelopmental disorders.
34974121|a|The gut microbiota is a complex community composed by several microorganisms that interact in the maintenance of homeostasis and contribute to physiological processes, including brain function. The relationship of the taxonomic composition of the gut microbiota with neurological diseases such as autism, Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, anxiety, and depression is widely recognized. The immune system is an important intermediary between the gut microbiota and the central nervous system, being one of the communication routes of the gut-brain axis. Although the complexity of the relationship between inflammation and epilepsy has not yet been elucidated, inflammatory processes are similar in many ways to the consequences of dysbiosis and contribute to disease progression. This study aimed to analyze the taxonomic composition of the gut microbiota of rats treated with prednisolone in a kindling model of epilepsy. Male Wistar rats (90 days, n = 24) divided into four experimental groups: sodium chloride solution 0.9 g%, diazepam 2 mg/kg, prednisolone 1 mg/kg, and prednisolone 5 mg/kg administered intraperitoneally (i.p.) for 14 days. The kindling model was induced by pentylenetetrazole (PTZ) 25 mg/kg i.p. on alternate days. The taxonomic profile was established by applying metagenomic DNA sequencing. There was no change in alpha diversity, and the composition of the gut microbiota between prednisolone and diazepam was similar. The significant increase in Verrucomicrobia, Saccharibacteria, and Actinobacteria may be related to the protective activity against seizures and inflammatory processes that cause some cases of epilepsy. Further studies are needed to investigate the functional influence that these species have on epilepsy and the inflammatory processes that trigger it.
34974069|a|This review assessed the specificity of facial emotion recognition impairment and the role of task characteristics in facial emotion recognition in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Based on subsets of 148 studies identified in PubMed and PsycINFO, random-effects meta-analyses showed significant impairment in recognizing all basic facial emotions in ASD. Additionally, ASD involves poorer facial emotion recognition than other clinical conditions and has similar impairment in recognizing emotional and nonemotional facial attributes, as well as in recognizing emotion in faces and other modalities. Furthermore, there are significant moderating effects for emotion complexity and holistic processing, a statistical trend for task type, and no significant effect for motion, social relevance, or stimulus salience on facial emotion recognition in ASD. Altogether, this review suggests nonselective facial emotion recognition impairment in ASD. Such impairment is relatively specific to ASD but is not specific to the recognition of emotional facial attributes or emotion recognition in the face modality. Identifying the role of task characteristics improves our mechanistic understanding of facial emotion recognition in ASD.
34973461|a|
34973273|a|Simultaneous EEG-fMRI is a growing and promising field, as it has great potential to further our understanding of the spatiotemporal dynamics of brain function in health and disease. In particular, there is much interest in understanding the fMRI correlates of brain activity in the gamma band ( > 30 Hz), as these frequencies are thought to be associated with cognitive processes involving perception, attention, and memory, as well as with disorders such as schizophrenia and autism. However, progress in this area has been limited due to issues such as MR-induced artifacts in EEG recordings, which seem to be more problematic for gamma frequencies. This paper presents a noise removal method for the gamma band of EEG that is based on the Holo-Hilbert spectral analysis (HHSA), but with a new implementation strategy. HHSA uses a nested empirical mode decomposition (EMD) to identify amplitude and frequency modulations (AM and FM, respectively) by averaging over frequencies with high and significant powers. Our method examines gamma band by applying two layers of EMD to the FM and AM components, removing components with very low power based on the power-instantaneous frequency spectrum, and subsequently reconstructs the denoised gamma-band signal from the remaining components. Simulations demonstrate that our proposed method efficiently reduces artifacts while preserving the original gamma signal which is especially critical for simultaneous EEG/fMRI studies.
34973012|a|In the modern world of rapidly increasing autistic spectrum disorder case rates, medical costs, societal impact, and long-waiting times from initial screening, there is a need for an easy, early screening of autistic spectrum disorder risk in children. In this paper, a mobile application was developed with these requirements, using machine learning algorithms achieving high performance compared to other applications that use simple rule approaches. A recently published autistic spectrum disorder dataset is used to train the model, containing hundreds of screening data from children in the ages 4 to 11.
34972219|a|
34972182|a|BACKGROUND: People who were born prematurely have high risks of many individual diseases and conditions in the early part of the life course. However, our knowledge of the burden of multiple diseases (multimorbidity) among prematurely born individuals is limited. We aimed to investigate the risk and patterns of chronic disease multimorbidity in adolescence and early adulthood among individuals born across the spectrum of gestational ages, comparing preterm and full-term born individuals. METHODS AND FINDINGS: We used individual-level data from linked nationwide registers to examine the associations of gestational age at birth with specialised healthcare records of >=2 chronic diseases (multimorbidity) in adolescence (age 10-17 years) and early adulthood (age 18-30 years). Our study population comprised 951,116 individuals (50.2% females) born alive in Finland between 1st January 1987 and 31st December 2006, inclusive. All individuals were followed from age 10 years to the onset of multimorbidity, emigration, death, or 31 December 2016 (up to age 30 years). We estimated hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for multimorbidity using flexible parametric survival models. During 6,417,903 person-years at risk (median follow-up: 7.9 years), 11,919 individuals (1.3%) had multimorbidity in adolescence (18.6 per 10,000 person-years). During 3,967,419 person-years at risk (median follow-up: 6.2 years), 15,664 individuals (1.7%) had multimorbidity in early adulthood (39.5 per 10,000 person-years). Adjusted HRs for adolescent multimorbidity, comparing preterm to full-term born individuals, were 1.29 (95% CI: 1.22 to 1.36) and 1.26 (95% CI: 1.18 to 1.35) in females and males, respectively. The associations of preterm birth with early adult multimorbidity were less marked, with the adjusted HRs indicating 1.18-fold risk in females (95% CI: 1.12 to 1.24) and 1.10-fold risk in males (95% CI: 1.04 to 1.17). We observed a consistent dose-response relationship between earlier gestational age at birth and increasing risks of both multimorbidity outcomes. Compared to full-term born males, those born at 37-38 weeks (early term) had a 1.06-fold risk of multimorbidity in adolescence (95% CI: 0.98 to 1.14) and this risk increased in a graded manner up to 6.85-fold (95% CI: 5.39 to 8.71) in those born at 23-27 weeks (extremely premature), independently of covariates. Among females, the same risks ranged from 1.16-fold (95% CI: 1.09 to 1.23) among those born at 37-38 weeks to 5.65-fold (95% CI: 4.45 to 7.18) among those born at 23-27 weeks. The corresponding risks of early adult multimorbidity were similar in direction but less marked in magnitude, with little difference in risks between males and females born at 36-37 weeks but up to 3-fold risks observed among those born at 23-27 weeks. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that an earlier gestational age at birth is associated with increased risks of chronic disease multimorbidity in the early part of the life course. There are currently no clinical guidelines for follow-up of prematurely born individuals beyond childhood, but these observations suggest that information on gestational age would be a useful characteristic to include in a medical history when assessing the risk of multiple chronic diseases in adolescent and young adult patients.
34971749|a|The axon initial segment (AIS) is a structural neuronal compartment of the proximal axon that plays key roles in sodium channel clustering, action potential initiation, and signal propagation of neuronal outputs. Mutations in constitutive genes of the AIS, such as ANK3, have been identified in patients with neurodevelopmental disorders. Nevertheless, morphological changes in the AIS in neurodevelopmental disorders have not been characterized. In this study, we investigated the length of the AIS in rodent models of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We observed abnormalities in AIS length in both animal models. In ADHD model rodents, we observed shorter AIS length in layer 2/3 (L2/3) neurons of the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and primary somatosensory barrel field (S1BF). Further, we observed shorter AIS length in S1BF L5 neurons. In ASD model mice, we observed shorter AIS length in L2/3 and L5 neurons of the S1BF. These results suggest that impairments in AIS length are common phenomena in neurodevelopmental disorders such as ADHD and ASD and may be conserved across species. Our findings provide novel insight into the potential contribution of the AIS to the pathophysiology and pathogenesis of neurodevelopmental disorders.
34970792|a|To investigate the diagnostic rate of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in a high-survival cohort of very preterm children, 77 infants born very preterm (<32 weeks of gestation) were assessed at age 4-6 years old using the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule, 2nd edition (ADOS-2), and the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition (DSM-5). Sixteen children (20.8%) were classified as both DSM-5-positive ASD and ADOS-2-identified "autism" which was defined as confirmed ASD in this study. Our result suggests that the prevalence of ASD in very preterm children might be much higher than reported in previous studies when all children were individually evaluated. Further studies in a large sample are required to clarify the true risk of ASD in preterm birth.
34970172|a|The identification of factors associated with functional outcome of subjects with schizophrenia is a great challenge in current research oriented to the personalization of care. The Italian Network for Research on Psychoses (NIRP) is a network of 26 university psychiatric clinics and/or mental health departments aimed to carry out multicenter research projects to improve the standards of prevention, diagnosis, and treatments of schizophrenia. The network has promoted 2 main studies, a cross-sectional one and a longitudinal one and seven "add-on" studies. The cross-sectional study of the network included 921 subjects with schizophrenia, 379 unaffected first-degree relatives of these patients, and 780 healthy controls. Results from this study documented that social and non-social cognition, functional capacity, negative symptoms, resilience, and family or social incentives strongly influence a measure of global functioning. The follow-up study included 618 patients from the original sample and has produced evidence of the key role of cognition, functional capacity, the experiential domain of negative symptoms, and everyday life skills in predicting functional outcome. The longitudinal study demonstrated that social cognition and the experiential domain of negative symptoms had an impact on interpersonal functioning, while non-social cognition had an impact on everyday life skills. Both non-social cognition and social cognition predicted work skills. The research question concerning the relationships of cognitive impairment and negative symptoms has been investigated with an innovative approach, using a structural equation model (SEM) and a network analysis. Both analyses demonstrated that only the experiential domain of negative symptoms had a distinct direct effect on functioning. The network analysis showed that expressive deficit was connected to functional capacity, as were social and non-social cognitive variables, and to disorganization. These findings were confirmed by the follow-up study. The add-on studies showed distinct electrophysiological correlates of the two negative symptom domains and the partial overlap between disorganization and neurocognitive impairment. Moreover, they identified and characterized a specific subgroup of patients suffering from schizophrenia with autism spectrum symptoms. The NIRP studies have implications for personalized management of patients with schizophrenia and highlight the need for a careful assessment of several domains rarely evaluated in clinical settings.
34970170|a|Measuring whole brain networks is a promising approach to extract features of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), a brain disorder of widespread regions. Objectives of this study were to evaluate properties of resting-state functional brain networks in children with and without ASD and to evaluate their relation with social impairment severity. Magnetoencephalographic (MEG) data were recorded for 21 children with ASD (7 girls, 60-89 months old) and for 25 typically developing (TD) control children (10 girls, 60-91 months old) in a resting state while gazing at a fixation cross. After signal sources were localized onto the Desikan-Killiany brain atlas, statistical relations between localized activities were found and evaluated in terms of the phase lag index. After brain networks were constructed and after matching with intelligence using a coarsened exact matching algorithm, ASD and TD graph theoretical measures were compared. We measured autism symptoms severity using the Social Responsiveness Scale and investigated its relation with altered small-worldness using linear regression models. Children with ASD were found to have significantly lower small-worldness in the beta band (p = 0.007) than TD children had. Lower small-worldness in the beta band of children with ASD was associated with higher Social Responsiveness Scale total t-scores (p = 0.047). Significant relations were also inferred for the Social Awareness (p = 0.008) and Social Cognition (p = 0.015) sub-scales. Results obtained using graph theory demonstrate a difference between children with and without ASD in MEG-derived resting-state functional brain networks, and the relation of that difference with social impairment. Combining graph theory and MEG might be a promising approach to establish a biological marker for ASD.
34970125|a|Recent large-scale neuroimaging studies suggest that most parts of the human brain show structural differences between the left and the right hemisphere. Such structural hemispheric asymmetries have been reported for both cortical and subcortical structures. Interestingly, many neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders have been associated with altered functional hemispheric asymmetries. However, findings concerning the relation between structural hemispheric asymmetries and disorders have largely been inconsistent, both within specific disorders as well as between disorders. In the present review, we compare structural asymmetries from a clinical neuroscience perspective across different disorders. We focus especially on recent large-scale neuroimaging studies, to concentrate on replicable effects. With the notable exception of major depressive disorder, all reviewed disorders were associated with distinct patterns of alterations in structural hemispheric asymmetries. While autism spectrum disorder was associated with altered structural hemispheric asymmetries in a broader range of brain areas, most other disorders were linked to more specific alterations in brain areas related to cognitive functions that have been associated with the symptomology of these disorders. The implications of these findings are highlighted in the context of transdiagnostic approaches to psychopathology.
34970101|a|Williams Syndrome (WS) is a rare genetic multisystem disorder that occurs because of a deletion of approximately 25 genes in the 7q11.23 chromosome region. This causes dysmorphic facial appearances, multiple congenital cardiovascular defects, delayed motor skills, and abnormalities in connective tissues and the endocrine system. The patients are mostly diagnosed with mild to moderate mental retardation, however, they have a hyper sociable, socially dis-inhibited, and outgoing personality, empathetic behavior, and are highly talkative. Oxytocin (OT), a neuropeptide synthesized at the hypothalamus, plays an important role in cognition and behavior, and is thought to be affecting WS patients' attitudes at its different amounts. Oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR), on chromosome 3p25.3, is considered regulating oxytocin receptors, via which OT exerts its effect. WS is a crucial disorder to understand gene, hormone, brain, and behavior associations in terms of sociality and neuropsychiatric conditions. Alterations to the WS gene region offer an opportunity to deepen our understandings of autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, anxiety, or depression. We aim to systematically present the data available of OT/OXTR regulation and expression, and the evidence for whether these mechanisms are dysregulated in WS. These results are important, as they predict strong epigenetic control over social behavior by methylation, single nucleotide polymorphisms, and other alterations. The comparison and collaboration of these studies may help to establish a better treatment or management approach for patients with WS if backed up with future research.
34970093|a|Fragile X syndrome is the most common monogenetic cause of inherited intellectual disability and syndromic autism spectrum disorder. Fragile X syndrome is caused by an expansion (full mutation >=200 CGGs repeats, normal 10-45 CGGs) of the fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene, epigenetic silencing of the gene, which leads to reduction or lack of the gene's product: the fragile X mental retardation protein. In this cross-sectional study, we assessed general and pharmacotherapy knowledge (GK and PTK) of fragile X syndrome and satisfaction with education in neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) among senior medical students in Serbia (N=348), Georgia (N=112), and Colombia (N=58). A self-administered 18-item questionnaire included GK (8/18) and PTK (7/18) components and self-assessment of the participants education in NDDs (3/18). Roughly 1 in 5 respondents had correct answers on half or more facts about fragile X syndrome (GK>PTK), which ranged similarly 5-7 in Serbia, 6-8 in Georgia, and 5-8 in Colombia, respectively. No cohort had an average value greater than 9 (60%) that would represent passing score "cut-off." None of the participants answered all the questions correctly. More than two-thirds of the participants concluded that they gained inadequate knowledge of NDDs during their studies, and that their education in this field should be more intense. In conclusion, there is a major gap in knowledge regarding fragile X syndrome among senior medical students in these three developing countries. The finding could at least in part be generalized to other developing countries aimed toward increasing knowledge and awareness of NDDs and fostering an institutional collaboration between developed and developing countries.
34969807|a|Megalencephaly-capillary malformation-polymicrogyria syndrome (MCAP) is a rare disorder that arises as a result of a somatic mosaic mutation in the PIK3CA gene. It characteristically presents with postnatal or congenital megalencephaly, cutaneous capillary malformations, postaxial polydactyly and often segmental or focal body overgrowth. We report a 7-year-old boy with known MCAP who was diagnosed at around 10 months old with a mosaic change in the PIK3CA gene. He was found to have hall-mark clinical signs; macrocephaly and four-limb postaxial polydactyly. Since diagnosis, he has had multiple clinical features, most of which typically present in children with MCAP. He has now been diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), demand avoidance and is under assessment for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Although some cases have been raised to the M-CM Network, to our knowledge this is the first case of ASD in MCAP to be reported in the literature.
34969045|a|
34968013|a|Exome sequencing has been proposed as the first-tier genetic testing in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Here, we performed exome sequencing in autistic individuals with average to high intellectual abilities (N = 207) to identify molecular diagnoses and genetic modifiers of intervention outcomes of social skills group training (SSGT) or standard care. We prioritized variants of clinical significance (VCS), variants of uncertain significance (VUS) and generated a pilot scheme to calculate genetic scores of rare and common variants in ASD-related gene pathways. Mixed linear models were used to test the association between the carrier status of VCS/VUS or the genetic scores with intervention outcomes measured by the social responsiveness scale. Additionally, we combined behavioral and genetic features using a machine learning (ML) model to predict the individual response. We showed a rate of 4.4% and 11.3% of VCS and VUS in the cohort, respectively. Individuals with VCS or VUS had improved significantly less after standard care than non-carriers at post-intervention (beta = 9.35; p = 0.036), while no such association was observed for SSGT (beta = -2.50; p = 0.65). Higher rare variant genetic scores for synaptic transmission and regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II were separately associated with less beneficial (beta = 8.30, p = 0.0044) or more beneficial (beta = -6.79, p = 0.014) effects after SSGT compared with standard care at follow-up, respectively. Our ML model showed the importance of rare variants for outcome prediction. Further studies are needed to understand genetic predisposition to intervention outcomes in ASD.
34967273|a|Families are the most significant communication partners for an individual with complex communication needs. Even though family-centered approaches are recommended to support augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) services for an individual, it is difficult to establish a successful plan that fits each individual's family. A framework for practitioners is proposed to effectively obtain and understand information about a family's unique dynamics as part of service delivery to positively impact AAC device uptake and long-term use. The goal of using this model is to minimize the disruption to the family while maximizing the integration of the AAC system. This paper proposes and illustrates a framework to enrich AAC services through the integration of several theoretical models of family systems theory, family paradigms, and a procedure called the self-created genogram. This paper begins by reviewing ecological family systems theory and family systems to guide and provide a framework to support effective AAC implementation. The process of self-creating genograms is then introduced as a means to obtain a rich perspective on family characteristics and dynamics that is informed by the individual who uses AAC. All of this information allows professionals to provide relevant information and tailor options for the family. As a result, the family is able to make informed decisions about AAC intervention in a manner most consistent with how they typically operate. Finally, we apply this framework to a hypothetical case of a child with autism and complex communication needs across three timepoints (preschool, late elementary/early middle school, and high school/post-secondary transition) to demonstrate how this framework can be used in clinical practice.
34967137|a|Autistic children and adults often have sleep disturbances, which may affect their and their family's quality of life. Yet, the relationship between sleep-wake patterns and autism spectrum traits is understudied. Identifying such relationships could lead to future research elucidating common mechanistic underpinnings. Thus, we aimed to determine whether sleep-wake patterns, specifically related to sleep, physical activity, and the daily sleep-wake rhythm (i.e., circadian rhythm), are associated with autism spectrum-related traits. Accelerometer-derived sleep-wake parameters were estimated in individuals with autistic spectrum traits and their family members (N = 267). We evaluated autism spectrum traits using the Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS) to assess the presence and severity of social impairment and the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function (BRIEF) to assess executive function. The linear multivariate regression analysis (using SOLAR-Eclipse) showed that in adults, increased core autism spectrum traits and executive dysfunction were associated with disruption of several sleep-wake parameters, particularly related to the daily sleep-wake rhythm, and that executive dysfunction was associated with disrupted sleep quality and level of physical activity. We highlight the interplay between daytime function and disrupted sleep-wake patterns, specifically related to the daily sleep-wake rhythm, that could guide future research into common mechanisms.
34967132|a|The heterogeneous nature of children with symptoms of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) makes it difficult to identify risk factors and effective treatment options. We sought to identify behavioral and developmental features that best define the heterogeneity and homogeneity in 2-5-year-old children classified with ASD and subthreshold ASD characteristics. Children were enrolled in a multisite case-control study of ASD. Detailed behavioral and developmental data were gathered by maternal telephone interview, parent-administered questionnaires, child cognitive evaluation, and ASD diagnostic measures. Participants with a positive ASD screen score or prior ASD diagnosis were referred for comprehensive evaluation. Children in the ASD group met study criteria based on this evaluation; children who did not meet study criteria were categorized as having subthreshold ASD characteristics. There were 1480 children classified as ASD (81.6% boys) and 594 children classified as having subthreshold ASD characteristics (70.2% boys) in the sample. Factors associated with dysregulation (e.g., aggression, anxiety/depression, sleep problems) followed by developmental abilities (e.g., expressive and receptive language skills) most contributed to heterogeneity in both groups of children. Atypical sensory response contributed to homogeneity in children classified as ASD but not those with subthreshold characteristics. These findings suggest that dysregulation and developmental abilities are clinical features that can impact functioning in children with ASD and other DD, and that documenting these features in pediatric records may help meet the needs of the individual child. Sensory dysfunction could be considered a core feature of ASD and thus used to inform more targeted screening, evaluation, treatment, and research efforts. LAY SUMMARY: The diverse nature of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) makes it difficult to find risk factors and treatment options. We identified the most dissimilar and most similar symptom(s) in children classified as ASD and as having subthreshold ASD characteristics. Factors associated with dysregulation and developmental abilities contributed to diversity in both groups of children. Sensory dysfunction was the most common symptom in children with ASD but not those with subthreshold characteristics. Findings can inform clinical practice and research.
34967130|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and schizophrenia (SCZ) are separate disorders, with distinct clinical profiles and natural histories. ASD, typically diagnosed in childhood, is characterized by restricted or repetitive interests or behaviors and impaired social communication, and it tends to have a stable course. SCZ, typically diagnosed in adolescence or adulthood, is characterized by hallucinations and delusions, and tends to be associated with declining function. However, youth with ASD are three to six times more likely to develop SCZ than their neurotypical counterparts, and increasingly, research has shown that ASD and SCZ converge at several levels. We conducted a systematic review of studies since 2013 relevant to understanding this convergence, and present here a narrative synthesis of key findings, which we have organized into four broad categories: symptoms and behavior, perception and cognition, biomarkers, and genetic and environmental risk. We then discuss opportunities for future research into the phenomenology and neurobiology of overlap between ASD and SCZ. Understanding this overlap will allow for researchers, and eventually clinicians, to understand the factors that may make a child with ASD vulnerable to developing SCZ. LAY SUMMARY: Autism spectrum disorder and schizophrenia are distinct diagnoses, but people with autism and people with schizophrena share several characteristics. We review recent studies that have examined these areas of overlap, and discuss the kinds of studies we will need to better understand how these disorders are related. Understanding this will be important to help us identify which autistic children are at risk of developing schizophrenia.
34966983|a|This research examined whether professional mentoring could have a positive effect on the occupational self-efficacy of autistic performing arts professionals. We compared the outcomes of one group who received mentoring to a waitlist control group. 26 participants took part in this study: 15 autistic mentees and 11 mentors, three of whom were also autistic. The mentoring programme was well received and felt to be beneficial by the participating mentees and mentors, particularly regarding gains in mentees' occupational self-efficacy. Professional mentoring also addressed several work-oriented challenges identified by autistic performing arts professionals such as feelings of isolation in the industry and need for consultation and advice on both a professional level, and for mentees with autistic mentors, also a neurodivergent one.
34966704|a|We examined feeding problems, including Avoidant Restrictive Food Intake Disorder (ARFID), in preschool children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Data were collected from a prospective longitudinal study of 46 children with ASD in a multiethnic, low resource area in Gothenburg, Sweden. Feeding problems were found in 76% of the children with ASD, and in 28%, the criteria for ARFID were met. The study highlights early onset age, the heterogeneity of feeding problems, and the need for multidisciplinary assessments in ASD as well as in feeding problems, and also the need for further elaboration of feeding disorder classifications in children.
34965160|a|This study investigated dance practice in psychosocial and functional aspects, and quality of life in children with Down syndrome and autism spectrum disorder. Children with DS and ASD, between 3 and 12 years old, attended a dance program during 16 sessions/lessons, lasting 60 min, twice a week, in suitable place. Functional Independence Measure (FIM), Childhood Autism Rating Scale SF-36 quality of life survey, and Knowledge, Attitude and Practice Inquiry (KAP Inquiry) were applied before and after dance classes. Eleven participants concluded the study. Functional independence changes were observed in relation to self-care, sphincter control, locomotion, and communication domains. Children' "quality of life" reported by parents showed changes in functional capacity, vitality, mental health, physical and social aspects, and general state of health domains. These findings suggest that regular dance practice can underlie psychosocial adjustments in children with DS and ASD.
34964979|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a set of neurodevelopmental disorders. Patients usually exhibit certain degree of social interaction impairment in accompany with impairment in language development as well as repetitive behaviors or interests. In recent years, ASD-related variants, genes, functional pathways, and expression patterns in the brain have been discovered, along with advance in sequencing techniques. This article reviews various aspects of genetic research in association with ASD.
34963655|a|OBJECTIVES: The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends that pediatricians screen all young children for autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force stated that there is insufficient evidence about the potential harms and benefits of universal ASD screening. To address this gap, we conducted qualitative interviews with caregivers of children who received a false positive ASD screen to learn about families' perceptions of the harms and benefits of universal ASD screening. METHODS: Culturally-diverse caregivers (N=26) of children with false-positive ASD screens completed qualitative interviews focused on parents' experiences with and recommendations to improve the ASD screening and evaluation process. Interviews were transcribed verbatim, coded, and analyzed using applied thematic analysis. RESULTS: Parents explained that the ASD screening and evaluation process increased their knowledge about child development and substantiated existing concerns. The ASD screening and evaluation process resulted in connecting their child to services, which parents felt led to improvements in their child's delays. Parents endorsed anxiety during wait times for the formal developmental assessment. However, all parents expressed that, if given the option, they would repeat the screening and evaluation process again. Caregivers recommended universal screening for ASD and suggested that screening extend beyond the pediatrician to other settings. CONCLUSIONS: From parents' perspectives, the connection to developmental services and increased knowledge of child development that resulted from the false positive ASD screen outweighed the time-limited emotional distress triggered by a positive ASD screen. Overall, parents' preferences for universal ASD screening align with the AAP's recommendations.
34963394|a|Very little is known about pediatric media guidance, or the one-on-onse advice that medical and clinical professionals (MCPs) communicate to parents about their children's recreational media and technology (RMT) use. One population that stands to benefit from a closer examination is children on the autism spectrum due to their behavior and communication challenges. We surveyed one group of pediatric autism MCPs, applied behavioral analysis (ABA) providers (N = 234), due to their proximity to families and conducted an applied thematic analysis of RMT advice they deliver. Providers reported primarily suggesting that caregivers employ restrictive parental mediation with their autistic child, that RMT should primarily be limited to use as a reward or reinforcement, and that parents should set time limits. Our findings offer new insights into the intersections of health communication theory and practice, while highlighting the need for greater research into RMT guidance for children with and without disabilities.
34962695|a|
34962445|a|PURPOSE: Early identification of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) via screeners for diagnostic measures are a high priority. At present, there is no consensus on one screener due to the need for better sensitivity and specificity. In this study, we report on the development and utility of the BABY-BISCUIT, a six-item screener based on a modified subset of items from the Baby and Infant Screen for Children with aUtIsm Traits (BISCUIT). METHODS: A sample of 504 children between 17-3 9months of age, who consisted of toddlers identified as at-risk for neurodevelopmental and other health disorders, were tested during an annual screening through the Louisiana EarlySteps program. RESULTS: An exploratory factor analysis yielded a one-factor solution (X2 = 48.62, df = 9, p = <.001). High sensitivity (i.e., 100.0%) at the cost of reduced specificity (i.e., 33.3%, AUC = 0.957) was found for an optimal screening cutoff score of 1. CONCLUSIONS: Findings from this study suggest that the BABY-BISCUIT has the potential to be a short and easily administered screener for ASD to inform whether further ASD assessment is necessary. Further investigation of convergent validity with established ASD measures is recommended.
34962441|a|Cumulus cell (CC) clumps that associate with oocytes provide the oocytes with growth and signaling factors. Thus, the metabolism of the CCs may influence oocyte function, and CC metabolism may be predictive of oocyte competence for in vitro fertilization. CCs are thought to be highly glycolytic, but data on the use of other potential carbon substrates are lacking in humans. This prospective and blinded cohort study was designed to examine the substrate utilization of CCs by age and oocyte competence. Individual sets of CC clumps from participants were removed after oocyte retrieval procedure then, incubated with stable isotope labeled substrates, and analyzed using liquid chromatography-high resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS) for isotopologue enrichment of major metabolic intermediates, including acetyl-CoA. The acyl-chain of acetyl-CoA contains 2 carbons that can be derived from 13C-labeled substrates resulting in an M + 2 isotopologue that contains 2 13C atoms. Comparing the fate of three major carbon sources, mean enrichment of M + 2 acetyl-CoA (mean, standard deviation) was for glucose (3.6, 7.7), for glutamine (9.4, 6.2), and for acetate (20.7, 13.9). Due to this unexpected high and variable labeling from acetate, we then examined acetyl-CoA mean % enrichment from acetate in 278 CCs from 21 women <=34 (49.06, 12.73) decreased with age compared to 124 CCs from 10 women >34 (43.48, 16.20) (p = 0.0004, t-test). The CCs associated with the immature prophase I oocytes had significantly lower enrichment in M + 2 acetyl CoA compared to the CCs associated with the metaphase I and metaphase II oocytes (difference: -6.02, CI: -1.74,-13.79, p = 0.013). Acetate metabolism in individual CC clumps was positively correlated with oocyte maturity and decreased with maternal age. These findings indicate that CC metabolism of non-glucose substrates should be investigated relative to oocyte function and age-related fertility.Abbreviations: CCs: cumulus cells; COC: cumulus-oocyte complex; LC-MS: liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry; acetyl-CoA: acetyl-Coenzyme A; CoA: Coenzyme A.
34961394|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Functional communication training, an intervention for challenging behavior rooted in principles of applied behavior analysis, has copious empirical support dating back to the mid-1980s for autistic individuals. Recently, there has been a concerted effort to thin reinforcement delivery during functional communication training using contingency-based delays that, in turn, are designed to enhance practicality and feasibility while not compromising efficacy. In this synthesis, we meta-analyzed the literature base with the goal of investigating both combined and across type effectiveness of contingency-based delays. We also aimed to investigate moderating variables that might impact intervention outcomes. Findings showed that contingency-based delays were effective for individuals with an autism spectrum disorder diagnosis and most effective when the delay incorporated some form of positive reinforcement. In addition, differential reinforcement of alternative-based delays was overall more effective when compared to differential reinforcement of other behavior-based delays. Noteworthy moderating variables found to impact contingency-based delay efficacy included the intervention dosage and the topography of behavior. We discuss these findings and highlight directions where additional empirical research is warranted to improve our understanding about contingency-based delays for individuals diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder.
34961364|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Autistic patients often undergo magnetic resonance imaging examinations. Within this environment, it is usual to feel anxious and overwhelmed by noises, lights or other people. The narrow scanners, the loud noises and the long examination time can easily cause panic attacks. This review aims to identify any adaptations for autistic individuals to have a magnetic resonance imaging scan without sedation or anaesthesia. Out of 4442 articles screened, 53 more relevant were evaluated and 21 were finally included in this study. Customising communication, different techniques to improve the environment, using technology for familiarisation and distraction have been used in previous studies. The results of this study can be used to make suggestions on how to improve magnetic resonance imaging practice and the autistic patient experience. They can also be used to create training for the healthcare professionals using the magnetic resonance imaging scanners.
34961363|a|LAY ABSTRACT: This work aimed to review recent research on the characteristics of individuals who have both autism spectrum disorder and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder due to their high co-occurrence. Thirty-four studies were analyzed and main findings summarized in two content domains focusing on areas that could enhance our understanding of the cognitive and behavioral characteristics of individuals with autism spectrum disorder + attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ASD+). Most of the results suggested that ASD+ is a co-occurring condition associated with more severe impairments in cognitive functioning, adaptive behavior, and increased likelihood to present more emotional/behavioral problems. These results will be helpful to provide improved care plans for individuals with both attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorder.
34961350|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Several medical professional societies recommend clinical genetic testing for autistic individuals as many genetic conditions are linked to autism. However, it is unclear to what extent autistic individuals and parents of autistic children are offered clinical genetic testing. We conducted a community-based survey to estimate the access, utilization, and awareness for clinical genetic testing in Sweden. In total, 868 parents of autistic children and 213 autistic adolescents or adults participated as respondents. The referral rate for clinical genetic testing after autism spectrum disorder diagnosis was low, with only 9.1% for the autistic children as reported by their parents and 2.8% for autistic adolescents/adults. The autistic children who got referrals were more likely to have intellectual disability and language disorder. We also report that awareness of the clinical genetic testing possibility was low in both respondent groups. We also highlight preferred communication means and needs for information before clinical genetic testing. Our results show that utilization and access are low in Sweden, and more studies should be conducted to report these rates in different countries to analyze the effects of clinical genetic testing on healthcare for autistic individuals. Our results highlight the most important information for the families and how the information should be communicated prior to clinical genetic testing.
34961348|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Cognitive behavioral therapy helps to treat anxiety symptoms in autistic youth, but it is difficult for families to access cognitive behavioral therapy in the community. Training school providers to deliver cognitive behavioral therapy may help autistic youth and their families to access these programs. Unfortunately, we do not know how cognitive behavioral therapy programs can be delivered by school providers and how these programs help the autistic students who access them. This study addressed this gap and was part of a larger study that looked at the effectiveness of Facing Your Fears-School-Based in 25 public schools. The study goals were to understand whether Facing Your Fears-School-Based helped students and the factors that made it easy or difficult to deliver Facing Your Fears-School-Based in schools. Thirty providers participated in interviews guided by the Reach, Effectiveness, Adoption, Implementation, and Maintenance framework. Participants shared information that fell into several major categories that included (1) delivering Facing Your Fears-School-Based to many different students; (2) the positive impact of Facing Your Fears-School-Based on students' school participation; and (3) plans to continue using Facing Your Fears-School-Based. School providers also shared that Facing Your Fears-School-Based was easy to use for non-mental health providers and reported adapting Facing Your Fears-School-Based to meet student needs. The results of this study suggest that Facing Your Fears-School-Based may help autistic students and highlight the importance of using mental health programs in schools that are flexible, able to be adapted, and that are able to be used by many different types of school providers.
34961342|a|LAY ABSTRACT: The next step for communication interventions for young children with autism include coaching/teaching for caregivers that have been tested in university clinics and testing these interventions in real world systems with early intervention providers who serve children and families in their communities. However, there are few projects that have tested how well the intervention can be transferred to community providers and what types of progress children and caregivers make in these services. This project took place in partnership with a community early intervention agency in the province of Ontario, Canada. The agency provided government-funded public health services. The agency was funded to take part in a pilot program to try out one of four early intervention models that included coaching for caregivers and was designed to support children's social engagement, play, and communication skills. The team decided to test two ways to start the intervention: (a) begin with observation of the practitioner for 4 weeks and then start coached practice with the child and (b) start coaching immediately. The team also tested two ways to support families for 3 months after intervention: (a) group booster sessions and (b) individual visits. The practitioners delivered the intervention well (M = 83%), and overall, caregivers and children made significant gains by the end of intervention in both observation + coaching and coaching. Attendance for follow-up boosters was variable with fewer families attending groups. More research is needed to test different strategies and roles to individualize interventions for caregivers with a range of goals and learning styles.
34961340|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Some theories suggested that social difficulties in autism arise from differences in the processing of faces. If face-processing difficulties are central to autism, then they should be as persistent as social difficulties across the lifespan. We tested this by asking autistic and neurotypical participants between 30 and 75 years to complete face detection tasks. Both autistic and neurotypical adults responded more slowly with age. When participants had to respond quickly, autistic adults made more errors in face detection regardless of their age. However, when the time constraint was removed, autistic adults performed as well as the neurotypical group. Across tasks, autistic adults responded more slowly when asked to detect both face and non-face stimuli. We also investigated brain activation differences in the face detection task with functional magnetic resonance imaging. The results indicated lower activation in the autism group in the left and right superior frontal gyrus. The superior frontal gyrus is not typically implicated in face processing but in more general processing, for example, keeping instructions in mind and following them. Together with the behavioral results, this suggests that there is no specific deficit in face processing in autistic adults between 30 and 75 years. Instead, the results suggest differences in general processing, particularly in the speed of processing. However, this needs to be investigated further with methods that are more sensitive to the timing of brain activation.
34960514|a|This work introduces a new socially assistive robot termed MARIA T21 (meaning "Mobile Autonomous Robot for Interaction with Autistics", with the addition of the acronym T21, meaning "Trisomy 21", which is used to designate individuals with Down syndrome). This new robot is used in psychomotor therapies for children with Down syndrome (contributing to improve their proprioception, postural balance, and gait) as well as in psychosocial and cognitive therapies for children with autism spectrum disorder. The robot uses, as a novelty, an embedded mini-video projector able to project Serious Games on the floor or tables to make already-established therapies funnier to these children, thus creating a motivating and facilitating effect for both children and therapists. The Serious Games were developed in Python through the library Pygame, considering theoretical bases of behavioral psychology for these children, which are integrated into the robot through the robot operating system (ROS). Encouraging results from the child-robot interaction are shown, according to outcomes obtained from the application of the Goal Attainment Scale. Regarding the Serious Games, they were considered suitable based on both the "Guidelines for Game Design of Serious Games for Children" and the "Evaluation of the Psychological Bases" used during the games' development. Thus, this pilot study seeks to demonstrate that the use of a robot as a therapeutic tool together with the concept of Serious Games is an innovative and promising tool to help health professionals in conducting therapies with children with autistic spectrum disorder and Down syndrome. Due to health issues imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic, the sample of children was limited to eight children (one child with typical development, one with Trisomy 21, both female, and six children with ASD, one girl and five boys), from 4 to 9 years of age. For the non-typically developing children, the inclusion criterion was the existence of a conclusive diagnosis and fulfillment of at least 1 year of therapy. The protocol was carried out in an infant psychotherapy room with three video cameras, supervised by a group of researchers and a therapist. The experiments were separated into four steps: The first stage was composed of a robot introduction followed by an approximation between robot and child to establish eye contact and assess proxemics and interaction between child/robot. In the second stage, the robot projected Serious Games on the floor, and emitted verbal commands, seeking to evaluate the child's susceptibility to perform the proposed tasks. In the third stage, the games were performed for a certain time, with the robot sending messages of positive reinforcement to encourage the child to accomplish the game. Finally, in the fourth stage, the robot finished the games and said goodbye to the child, using messages aiming to build a closer relationship with the child.
34960265|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a combination of developmental anomalies that causes social and behavioral impairments, affecting around 2% of US children. Common symptoms include difficulties in communications, interactions, and behavioral disabilities. The onset of symptoms can start in early childhood, yet repeated visits to a pediatric specialist are needed before reaching a diagnosis. Still, this diagnosis is usually subjective, and scores can vary from one specialist to another. Previous literature suggests differences in brain development, environmental, and/or genetic factors play a role in developing autism, yet scientists still do not know exactly the pathology of this disorder. Currently, the gold standard diagnosis of ASD is a set of diagnostic evaluations, such as the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) or Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R) report. These gold standard diagnostic instruments are an intensive, lengthy, and subjective process that involves a set of behavioral and communications tests and clinical history information conducted by a team of qualified clinicians. Emerging advancements in neuroimaging and machine learning techniques can provide a fast and objective alternative to conventional repetitive observational assessments. This paper provides a thorough study of implementing feature engineering tools to find discriminant insights from brain imaging of white matter connectivity and using a machine learning framework for an accurate classification of autistic individuals. This work highlights important findings of impacted brain areas that contribute to an autism diagnosis and presents promising accuracy results. We verified our proposed framework on a large publicly available DTI dataset of 225 subjects from the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange-II (ABIDE-II) initiative, achieving a high global balanced accuracy over the 5 sites of up to 99% with 5-fold cross validation. The data used was slightly unbalanced, including 125 autistic subjects and 100 typically developed (TD) ones. The achieved balanced accuracy of the proposed technique is the highest in the literature, which elucidates the importance of feature engineering steps involved in extracting useful knowledge and the promising potentials of adopting neuroimaging for the diagnosis of autism.
34960049|a|Gastrointestinal dysfunction is one of the most prevalent physiological symptoms of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). A growing body of largely preclinical research suggests that dysbiotic gut microbiota may modulate brain function and social behavior, yet little is known about the mechanisms that underlie these relationships and how they may influence the pathogenesis or severity of ASD. While various genetic and environmental risk factors have been implicated in ASD, this review aims to provide an overview of studies elucidating the mechanisms by which gut microbiota, associated metabolites, and the brain interact to influence behavior and ASD development, in at least a subgroup of individuals with gastrointestinal problems. Specifically, we review the brain-gut-microbiome system and discuss findings from current animal and human studies as they relate to social-behavioral and neurological impairments in ASD, microbiota-targeted therapies (i.e., probiotics, fecal microbiota transplantation) in ASD, and how microbiota may influence the brain at molecular, structural, and functional levels, with a particular interest in social and emotion-related brain networks. A deeper understanding of microbiome-brain-behavior interactions has the potential to inform new therapies aimed at modulating this system and alleviating both behavioral and physiological symptomatology in individuals with ASD.
34959804|a|Preeclampsia is a pregnancy disorder characterized by hypertension. Epidemiological studies have associated preeclampsia with an increased risk of neurodevelopmental disorders in offspring, such as autism and schizophrenia. Preeclampsia has also been linked with maternal vitamin D deficiency, another candidate risk factor also associated with autism. Our laboratory has established a gestational vitamin-D-deficient rat model that shows consistent and robust behavioural phenotypes associated with autism- and schizophrenia-related animal models. Therefore, we explored here whether this model also produces preeclampsia as a possible mediator of behavioural phenotypes in offspring. We showed that gestational vitamin D deficiency was not associated with maternal blood pressure or proteinuria during late gestation. Maternal and placental angiogenic and vasculogenic factors were also not affected by a vitamin-D-deficient diet. We further showed that exposure to low vitamin D levels did not expose the placenta to oxidative stress. Overall, gestational vitamin D deficiency in our rat model was not associated with preeclampsia-related features, suggesting that well-described behavioural phenotypes in offspring born to vitamin-D-deficient rat dams are unlikely to be mediated via a preeclampsia-related mechanism.
34959111|a|OBJECTIVE: To explore whether 1 Hz repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) has positive effects on brain activity and behavior of autistic children with intellectual disability. METHODS: 32 autistic children with intellectual disability (26 boys and 6 girls) were recruited to participate in this feasibility study. The autistic children were divided randomly and equally into an experimental group and a control group. 16 children (three girls and 13 boys; mean +- SD age: 7.8 +- 2.1 years) who received rTMS treatment twice a week were served as the experimental group, while 16 children (three girls and 13 boys; mean +- SD age: 7.2 +- 1.6 years) with sham stimulation were considered as the control group. Recurrence quantification analysis (RQA) was employed to quantify the nonlinear features of electroencephalogram (EEG) signals recorded during the resting state. Three RQA measures, including recursive rate (RR), deterministic (DET) and mean diagonal length (L) were extracted from the EEG signals to characterize the deterministic features of cortical activity. RESULTS: Significant differences in RR and DET were observed between the experimental group and the control group. We also found discernible discrepancies in the Autism Behavior Checklist (ABC) score pre- and post-rTMS for the experimental group. CONCLUSIONS: 1 Hz repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) could positively influence brain activity and behavior of autistic children with intellectual disability.
34957885|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Personal interests in autism are a source of joy, pride, and assist with the formation of social relationships. However, highly intense engagement can also interfere with other activities including activities of daily living. Theories have suggested that intense interests relate to executive functioning, reward sensitivity, and anxiety symptoms; but none of these theories have been tested in early childhood. Understanding which behavioral traits relate to intense interests in early childhood could help understand how intense interests may emerge, while also providing clues for how to manage interest intensity and best promote the many benefits of personal interests. We recruited families with autistic and non-autistic children aged 3-6 years. Parents completed questionnaires to assess children's interest diversity and intensity, executive functioning, reward sensitivity, and anxiety symptoms. We found that for autistic and non-autistic children, greater difficulty shifting attention between activities related to more intense interests. In autistic children only, difficulty with inhibitory control of attention also related to more intense interests. However, reward sensitivity and anxiety symptoms did not relate to interest intensity. Based on these observations, assisting young children with developing executive functioning skills could help with mediating the interference of interests in daily life to ultimately promote the many benefits of personal interests.
34957880|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Flexibility difficulties in autism might be particularly common in complex situations, when shifts (i.e. the switch of attentional resources or strategy according to the situation) are unpredictable, implicit (i.e. not guided by explicit rules) and the stimuli are complex. We analyzed the data of 101 autistic and 145 non-autistic adults, without intellectual deficiency, on two flexibility tasks performed online. The first task involved unpredictable and non-explicit shifts of complex socio-emotional stimuli, whereas the second task involved predictable and explicit shifts of character stimuli. Considering the discrepancies between laboratory results and the real-life flexibility-related challenges faced by autistic individuals, we need to determine which factor could be of particular importance in flexibility difficulties. We point out that the switch cost (i.e. the difference between shift and non-shift condition) was larger for autistic than for non-autistic participants on the complex flexibility task with unpredictable and non-explicit shifts of socio-emotional stimuli, whereas this was not the case when shifts were predictable, explicit and involved less complex stimuli. We also highlight sex differences, suggesting that autistic females have better social skills than autistic males and that they also have a specific cognitive profile, which could contribute to social camouflaging. The findings of this work help us understand which factors could influence flexibility difficulties in autism and are important for designing future studies. They also add to the literature on sex differences in autism which underpin better social skills, executive function, and camouflaging in autistic females.
34957701|a|Acoustic atypicalities in speech production are argued to be potential markers of clinical features in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). A recent meta-analysis highlighted shortcomings in the field, in particular small sample sizes and study heterogeneity. We showcase a cumulative (i.e., explicitly building on previous studies both conceptually and statistically) yet self-correcting (i.e., critically assessing the impact of cumulative statistical techniques) approach to prosody in ASD to overcome these issues. We relied on the recommendations contained in the meta-analysis to build and analyze a cross-linguistic corpus of multiple speech productions in 77 autistic and 72 neurotypical children and adolescents (>1000 recordings in Danish and US English). We used meta-analytically informed and skeptical priors, with informed priors leading to more generalizable inference. We replicated findings of a minimal cross-linguistically reliable distinctive acoustic profile for ASD (higher pitch and longer pauses) with moderate effect sizes. We identified novel reliable differences between the two groups for normalized amplitude quotient, maxima dispersion quotient, and creakiness. However, the differences were small, and there is likely no one acoustic profile characterizing all autistic individuals. We identified reliable relations of acoustic features with individual differences (age, gender), and clinical features (speech rate and ADOS sub-scores). Besides cumulatively building our understanding of acoustic atypicalities in ASD, the study shows how to use systematic reviews and meta-analyses to guide the design and analysis of follow-up studies. We indicate future directions: larger and more diverse cross-linguistic datasets, focus on heterogeneity, self-critical cumulative approaches, and open science. LAY SUMMARY: Autistic individuals are reported to speak in distinctive ways. Distinctive vocal production can affect social interactions and social development and could represent a noninvasive way to support the assessment of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We systematically checked whether acoustic atypicalities highlighted in previous articles could be actually found across multiple recordings and two languages. We find a minimal acoustic profile of ASD: higher pitch, longer pauses, increased hoarseness and creakiness of the voice. However, there is much individual variability (by age, sex, language, and clinical characteristics). This suggests that the search for one common "autistic voice" might be naive and more fine-grained approaches are needed.
34957636|a|BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Recent work highlights an increase in the overlap of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and substance use disorder (SUD). Little is known about the presence of ASD symptoms in SUD-treatment-seeking populations. METHODS: The informant-rated Social Responsiveness Scale-2 (SRS-2) was completed at intake to an outpatient SUD clinic for youth aged 16-26 (N = 69). Comparisons were made between those with elevated SRS-2 scores on demographic, psychiatric, and substance use variables. RESULTS: Parents of sixty-nine patients with SUD completed the SRS-2. Fourteen (20%) (average age 18.7 +- 2.5) had elevated SRS-2 Total T-scores (>=66) and 55 (average age 18.1 +- 2.8) had non-clinical SRS-2 Total T-scores. There were few differences between groups; however, those with elevated SRS-2 Total T-scores were more likely to have a stimulant use disorder (odds ratio [OR] = 7.59, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.77, 101.88; p = 0.05) or an opioid use disorder (OR = 5.02, 95% CI = 0.59, 43.27; p = 0.08) than patients with normal SRS-2 Total T-scores as well as alcohol use in the week prior to intake. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS: A significant proportion of treatment-seeking SUD outpatients suffer from clinically elevated autistic traits. These findings highlight the importance of assessing for autistic traits in SUD treatment settings yet additional research is needed to determine if these findings are specific to the presence of ASD or secondary to sequelae of specific SUD presentations. SCIENTIFIC SIGNIFICANCE: This study is, to our knowledge, the first to have examined the prevalence, morbidity, or clinical characteristics, associated with ASD symptoms in a SUD-specific population.
34957416|a|Most tissue samples are composed of different cell types. Differential expression analysis without accounting for cell type composition cannot separate the changes due to cell type composition or cell type-specific expression. We propose a computational framework to address these limitations: Cell Type Aware analysis of RNA-seq (CARseq). CARseq employs a negative binomial distribution that appropriately models the count data from RNA-seq experiments. Simulation studies show that CARseq has substantially higher power than a linear model-based approach and it also provides more accurate estimate of the rankings of differentially expressed genes. We have applied CARseq to compare gene expression of schizophrenia/autism subjects versus controls, and identified the cell types underlying the difference and similarities of these two neuron-developmental diseases. Our results are consistent with the results from differential expression analysis using single cell RNA-seq data.
34956949|a|Background: Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a contagious disease caused by a newly identified coronavirus. Our knowledge about the survival rate and prognostic factors of the disease is not established well. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the predictors of COVID-19 mortality in Hamadan province in western Iran. Methods: In this study, we included all laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 cases with known treatment outcomes in Hamadan province, Iran, between 20, 2020, to May 10, 2020. Demographic, clinical, laboratory data, and treatment outcomes were obtained from computerized medical records and compared between survived cases and patients with death outcomes. Univariable and multivariable logistic regression models were used to determine the predictors of death. Results: From 749 investigated patients, 77 patients (10.28%) died during the treatment. The Mean age of patients was 53.97+-19.04 years. Multivariable logistic regression showed that males had 2.07 (95% CI: 1.73, 2.54) fold higher odds of death. Those with 60 years old and more had 6.49 (95% CI: 4.53, 7.93) fold higher odds of death. Patients with an underlying disease had 7.14 (95% CI: 6.94, 7.38) fold higher odds of death, and patients who were hospitalized in the ICU ward had 2.24 (95% CI: 1.75, 2.90) times higher odds of COVID-19 related mortality. Conclusion: The potential predictors of death in COVID-19 cases, including the male gender, older age, and having an underlying disease could help physicians to identify patients with poor prognoses at an early stage and better management of them.
34956651|a|Cortical interneurons are GABAergic inhibitory cells that connect locally in the neocortex and play a pivotal role in shaping cortical network activities. Dysfunction of these cells is believed to lead to runaway excitation underlying seizure-based diseases, such as epilepsy, autism and schizophrenia. There is a growing interest in using cortical interneurons derived from human pluripotent stem cells for understanding their complex development and for modeling neuropsychiatric diseases. Here, we report the identification of a novel role of transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) signaling in modulating interneuron progenitor maintenance and neuronal differentiation. TGFbeta signaling inhibition suppresses terminal differentiation of interneuron progenitors, while exogenous TGFbeta3 accelerates the transition of progenitors into postmitotic neurons. We provide evidence that TGFb signaling exerts this function via regulating cell cycle length of the NKX2.1+ neural progenitors. Together, the present study represents a useful platform for studying human interneuron development and interneuron-associated neurological diseases with human pluripotent stem cells.
34955917|a|Background: Social communication (SC) includes the use and interpretation of verbal and non-verbal messages within a social context and thus requires more than knowledge of language. Social communication skills are essential for connecting and engaging with others, and SC deficits are often associated with emotional and behavioral problems. There is a lack of feasible instruments for assessing SC skills in individuals with intellectual disability (ID). Methods: A questionnaire on social communication in adults with ID (QSC-ID) comprising 20 Likert-scaled items was developed and completed on behalf of participants (n = 52) from three Austrian therapeutic living communities for people with ID and deafness by their living- and working-facility key caregivers. The sample of adults with hearing loss was considered ideal for the development of a measure of SC that is not restricted to a specific communication mode or overly related with language skills. Results: The preliminary results showed high construct validity. Correlations were high between SC and language, social skills, and severity of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), moderate between SC and adaptive skills, and non-verbal intelligence and, as expected, low between SC and motor skills. Interrater reliability was found to be good or at least acceptable for all items. Total raw scores were well-distributed over the whole range-Cut-offs based on the 10th and 20th percentile are suggested to identify atypical and borderline SC skills. Caregiver feedback and completeness of data suggest that the questionnaire is highly feasible. Conclusion: Questionnaire on social communication in adults with ID is an easy-to-use caregiver-reported questionnaire for use with individuals with mild to severe forms of ID. Initial testing of validity looks promising. Further validation in populations with typical hearing is required. Due to substantial correlations between SC and structural language skills the calculation of specific SC cut-offs for different levels of linguistic skills should be considered when sufficient data is available.
34955912|a|Autistic traits (ATs) include symptoms associated with autism spectrum conditions (ASCs), which are assumed to be continuously distributed across the general population. Studies have indicated the cultural differences in the expression of ATs. Notwithstanding, our literature review indicated that studies on cross-cultural differences in the expression of ATs included samples from different countries. This is the first study designed to compare the expression of ATs between different ethnicities from the same country. Using the Autism-spectrum Quotient (AQ-28), we examined the possible cultural differences in the expression of autistic traits from four groups of students with different ethnic backgrounds, including Turkish (n = 262), Persian (n = 290), Kurdish (n = 300), and Luri (n = 307) students. Behaviors associated with autistic traits were reported overall higher for males than females. Also, significant cultural differences in autistic traits were found that were different for males and females. Furthermore, while the medical sciences student group scored significantly higher than the humanities group in the Imagination dimension, the humanities group had significantly higher scores in Number/Pattern dimensions than the engineering and medical sciences groups. Altogether, our results provide further support for the idea that the expression of ATs is significantly influenced by culture. A significant limitation of the current study was that groups were not matched with respect to age, percentage of male participants, and fields of studies and that these variables may influence the AQ scores.
34955742|a|[This corrects the article DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2021.771557.].
34955712|a|Introduction: Gain-of-function mutations in the L-type Ca2+ channel Cav1.2 cause Timothy syndrome (TS), a multisystem disorder associated with neurologic symptoms, including autism spectrum disorder (ASD), seizures, and intellectual disability. Cav1.2 plays key roles in neural development, and its mutation can affect brain development and connectivity through Ca2+-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Recently, a gain-of-function mutation, I1166T, in Cav1.2 was identified in patients with TS-like disorder. Its channel properties have been analyzed in vitro but in vivo effects of this mutation on brain development remain unexplored. Methods: In utero electroporation was performed on ICR mice at embryonic day 15 to express GFP, wild-type, and mutant Cav1.2 channels into cortical layer 2/3 excitatory neurons in the primary somatosensory area. The brain was fixed at postnatal days 14-16, sliced, and scanned using confocal microscopy. Neuronal migration of electroporated neurons was examined in the cortex of the electroporated hemisphere, and callosal projection was examined in the white matter and contralateral hemisphere. Results: Expression of the I1166T mutant in layer 2/3 neurons caused migration deficits in approximately 20% of electroporated neurons and almost completely diminished axonal arborization in the contralateral hemisphere. Axonal projection in the white matter was not affected. We introduced second mutations onto Cav1.2 I1166T; L745P mutation blocks Ca2+ influx through Cav1.2 channels and inhibits the Ca2+-dependent pathway, and the W440A mutation blocks the interaction of the Cav1.2 alpha1 subunit to the beta subunit. Both second mutations recovered migration and projection. Conclusion: This study demonstrated that the Cav1.2 I1166T mutation could affect two critical steps during cerebrocortical development, migration and axonal projection, in the mouse brain. This is mediated through Ca2+-dependent pathway downstream of Cav1.2 and beta subunit-interaction.
34955622|a|Partners in School is a consultation model with the goal of enhancing communication between two of the most important stakeholders in children's lives - parents and teachers. Using a single-group pre-post design, this preliminary study examined the effect of Partners in School on parent-teacher communication outcomes and the factors associated with these outcomes. Participants were 26 teachers and 49 parents of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Parents and teachers completed surveys before and after participating in Partners in School. Teachers reported an increase in their communication to parents. However, parents did not report an increase in their communication to teachers. Teachers' self-efficacy, expectations, and intervention fidelity were associated with increased communication to parents. Parental self-efficacy and teacher experience were associated with parents' reports of communication to teachers. Our findings suggest that family-school consultation services may be used to enhance teachers' communication with parents.
34955354|a|PURPOSE: We aimed to determine whether the use of a structured teaching approach, rehearsing, and training (SRT) for anesthesia induction in patients with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) could reduce the need for physical restraint. DESIGN: Retrospective observational study METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed 63 patients (4 to 40 y old) with ASD who underwent general anesthesia for dental treatment. Patients were divided into SRT (n = 22) and non-SRT (n = 41) groups. In the SRT group, patients were presented with a visual guide based on a structured teaching approach at the pre-anesthetic consultation. The guide comprised photographs of the places, tools, and processes that the patient would experience prior to anesthesia induction. Patients then practiced these processes (rehearsal). Patients in the non-SRT group were administered anesthesia in a conventional manner without SRT. FINDINGS: The percentage of patients needing physical restraint was significantly lower in the SRT (3/22, 13%) than in the non-SRT group (21/41, 51%, P < .001). CONCLUSIONS: The SRT method reduces the need for physical restraint in patients with ASD during anesthesia induction.
34955038|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Atypical face scanning is suggested to be related to social interactions and communicative deficits in autistic children. We systematically examined whether autistic and non-autistic children used consistent scanning patterns when performing different tasks and scanning different types of faces. We found that autistic children scanned faces more variably than non-autistic children: While non-autistic children used more consistent scanning patterns, autistic children's scanning patterns changed frequently when watching different faces. Autistic children's variable face scanning patterns might delay and impair face processing, resulting in a social interaction deficit. What's more, variable scanning patterns may create an unstable and unpredictable perception of the environment for autistic children. Developing in such an unstable environment might motivate autistic children to retract from the environment, avoid social interaction, and focus instead on the performance of repetitive behavior. Therefore, studying face scanning variability might represent a new avenue for understanding core symptoms in autistic people.
34954761|a|OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to present clinician and caregiver perspectives regarding telehealth neurodevelopmental evaluation delivered at the onset of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. Specifically, we sought to describe telehealth neurodevelopmental evaluations, examine associations between child characteristics and diagnostic factors, determine the impact of technology and family barriers, and report on clinician and caregiver satisfaction with telehealth evaluation. METHODS: In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, in-person clinical services at a large children's hospital neurodevelopmental clinic were transitioned to telehealth. Data are presented for 254 remote evaluations of children (18-212 months; referral concern: 51% autism spectrum disorder [ASD], 24% developmental delay/intellectual disability, 25% other neurodevelopmental concern) conducted from May to July 2020. Data were gathered from electronic health records as well as clinician and caregiver surveys. RESULTS: A clinical diagnosis was provided in 72% of telehealth evaluations. Clinicians rated diagnostic certainty as "completely" or "somewhat" certain in 74% of evaluations. Certainty ratings were higher for evaluations in which a diagnosis of ASD was provided. Although technology and family challenges were reported, clinicians rarely identified these as disruptive to the evaluation process. Clinicians reported satisfaction with various aspects of delivering telehealth. Caregivers endorsed high satisfaction with receipt of telehealth and reduced travel burden. CONCLUSION: The COVID-19 pandemic has rapidly transformed service delivery for individuals with neurodevelopmental disabilities and provided an unprecedented opportunity to evaluate the deployment of telehealth evaluation to meet the need for ongoing diagnostic care. Our findings suggest that telehealth holds significant promise for neurodevelopmental assessment both within the context of a global pandemic and beyond.
34954511|a|Early-life seizures (ELS) are associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD); however, due to a lack of effective treatments for ELS, it is not clear whether ELS plays a causal role, potentiates the ASD phenotype, or is the result of a common pathophysiology. Deficits in communications are a core feature of ASD. To isolate the impact of ELS on communication, we probed the behavioral consequences of a single episode of kainic acid-induced early-life seizures (KA-ELS) in male and female Sprague-Dawley (CD) rats. Deficits in auditory communication were observed in adult male rats as assessed by behavioral response to ultrasonic vocalization (USV) playback. Ultrasonic vocalizations are classified into two major categories - 50-kHz (positive) calls and 22-kHz (aversive) calls. Behavioral response was assessed via rat preference for different USV playback in a radial arm maze. Response to 22-kHz calls was not impacted by ELS while response to 50-kHz calls was impacted. All rats demonstrated positional preference for the arms adjacent to where 50-kHz calls were playing compared to background noise; however, male ELS rats demonstrated a greater positional preference for the arms adjacent to where 50-kHz calls were playing compared to male control rats. These studies demonstrate that responses to socially relevant auditory cues are chronically altered in adult male rats following a single episode of ELS. We speculate that these changes contribute to previously reported social deficits associated with ELS.
34954508|a|SYNGAP1-developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (SYNGAP1-DEE) has been recently featured as a distinct genetic disease characterized by global psychomotor delay mainly involving language, moderate-to-severe cognitive impairment, autism spectrum disorder, and a generalized epilepsy with spontaneous and reflex seizures. The severity and variability of function impairment and the impact on patients' and caregivers' daily life are still poorly acknowledged. The SYNGAP1 Italian Family Association developed a survey, shared online with caregivers, exploring several issues, including: epilepsy outcome, comorbidities, daily-living skills, hospitalizations, rehabilitation treatments, economic burden, and COVID-19 pandemic impact. Caregivers of 13 children and adolescents participated in the survey. They most often show a fine and gross-motor impairment and a drug-resistant epilepsy with possibility to experience pluridaily absence seizures that may lead to periods of psychomotor regressions. Eating and sleep problems are reported in the majority. Most parents are concerned about language impairment, behavioral issues and lack of autonomy in daily-living activities. Specific neuropsychological evaluations for autism should be early considered in order to identify intervention strategies involving alternative communication strategies, which can positively affect behavior and quality of life. Rehabilitation treatment should aim to the acquisition and consolidation of personal autonomy.
34954299|a|Due to the financial burden and undesired side effects of treatment options, researchers have begun exploring alternative methods of treating autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Based on research suggesting impressive health benefits of engaging in physical activity, exercise treatment to alleviate symptoms could be a more cost effective alternative to pharmaceutical interventions. This study examined the effects of physical exercise on nociceptive responses and social interactions in an autism mouse model (BTBR T+ Itpr3tf/J). Subjects (n = 32) were separated into groups (BTBR vs B6 controls) based on the genetic strain and activity condition they were assigned. When compared to B6 controls, the BTBR mice demonstrated thermal hypoalgesia that normalized following 5 weeks of voluntary wheel running. However, exercise did not significantly attenuate social interaction deficits in BTBR mice, despite scores trending toward a positive direction. These results suggest that exercise could serve as a potential additive to other therapies for abnormal nociception in individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder.
34954253|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a severe neuropsychiatric brain disorder that affects people's social communication and daily routine. Considering the phenomenon of abnormal brain function in the early stage of ASD, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), an excellent technique that measures brain activity, provides effective data to study ASD. Therefore, based on fMRI data of ASD cases, this paper reviews the progress of machine learning methods and deep learning methods in ASD classification and recognition in the last three years and summarizes the different research results of fMRI data extracted from the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE). From the classification performance of classification and recognition of ASD by the two methods, comparing the important classification indicators such as accuracy, sensitivity and specificity, the current challenges and future development trends are reported, which can provide an essential reference for the early diagnosis of ASD cases.
34954074|a|Epidemiologic studies have demonstrated that infections during pregnancy increase the risk of offspring developing Schizophrenia, Autism, Depression and Bipolar Disorder and have implicated interleukin-6 (IL-6) as a causal agent. However, other cytokines have been associated with the developmental origins of psychiatric disorders; therefore, it remains to be established whether elevating IL-6 is sufficient to alter the trajectory of neural development. Furthermore, most rodent studies have manipulated the maternal immune system at mid-gestation, which affects the stem cells and progenitors in both the primary and secondary germinal matrices. Therefore, a question that remains to be addressed is whether elevating IL-6 when the secondary germinal matrices are most active will affect brain development. Here, we have increased IL-6 from postnatal days 3-6 when the secondary germinal matrices are rapidly expanding. Using Nestin-CreERT2 fate mapping we show that this transient increase in IL-6 decreased neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the dorsal hippocampus, reduced astrogliogenesis in the amygdala and decreased oligodendrogenesis in the body and splenium of the corpus callosum all by ~50%. Moreover, the IL-6 treatment elicited behavioral changes classically associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. As adults, IL-6 injected male mice lost social preference in the social approach test, spent ~30% less time socially engaging with sexually receptive females and produced ~50% fewer ultrasonic vocalizations during mating. They also engaged ~50% more time in self-grooming behavior and had an increase in inhibitory avoidance. Altogether, these data provide new insights into the biological mechanisms linking perinatal immune activation to complex neurodevelopmental brain disorders.
34954053|a|Biallelic loss-of-function NSUN2 mutations have recently been associated with cases of Autism Spectrum Condition (ASC), and NSun2-deficiency was also previously shown to cause a severe autosomal recessive intellectually disability disorder syndrome in which patients can sometimes display autistic behaviour. It has been demonstrated that NSUN2 can control protein synthesis rates via direct regulation of RNA methylation, and it is therefore of interest that other studies have suggested protein synthesis-dependent synaptic plasticity dysregulation as a mechanism for learning difficulties in various other autism-expressing conditions. Here we investigated NDMAR-LTP in a murine transgenic model harbouring loss-of-function mutation in the NSun2 gene and find an impairment of a protein synthesis-dependent form of this synaptic plasticity pathway. Our findings support the idea that NMDAR-LTP mis-regulation may represent a previously underappreciated mechanism associated with autism phenotypes.
34953928|a|BACKGROUND: There is evidence that social impairments in Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) differ from those observed in idiopathic autism as they are characterized mainly by social anxiety. However, the knowledge of the fundamental features of social anxiety symptoms in this target population is limited. This brief systematic review aims to investigate the relationship between social anxiety and CdLS through multiple cross-sectional comparisons. METHODS: PRISMA-P guidelines were followed, and the literature research was conducted in Pubmed, EBSCOhost, Google Scholar, and ScienceDirect using "Cornelia de Lange Syndrome" or "CdLS" and "social anxiety" as search terms. RESULTS: Six articles met the eligibility criteria. Results show that heightened levels of social anxiety in CdLS individuals occur before and after the social engagement and are mediated by both the nature of the social demand and the familiarity of the examiner they interact with. LIMITATIONS: The interpretation of results is limited by the wide heterogeneity of patients' age and sample size across the reviewed studies, and by the absence of a unique observational procedure to detect behaviors indicative of social anxiety in syndromic individuals. CONCLUSIONS: These findings have considerable clinical implications for intervention planning which might be generalized to all people with intellectual disability linked to a genetic syndrome.
34953921|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by difficulties with social communication and restricted or repetitive patterns of behavior. This disorder was characterized by widespread abnormalities involving distributed brain networks. As one such key network node, the insular cortex has been regarded as a research focus of ASD neuropathology. The insula is a functionally complex brain structure. However, it is not fully clear if dynamic characteristics of resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (R-fMRI) signals in insular heterogeneous could be used to depict abnormalities in ASD. To address this question, we investigated dynamic functional connectivity (dFC) of 12 insular subregions. Data were obtained from 44 individuals with ASD and 65 typically developing age-matched controls (TDC). We assessed dFC by sliding-window method and quantified its temporal variability. Multivariable linear regression models were constructed to determine whether dFC support complementary information about symptom severity of individuals with ASD rather than static functional connectivity (sFC). The results showed that individuals with ASD exhibited dFC and sFC alterations in distinct insular subregions. Some brain regions showed only abnormal dFC but not sFC with insular subregions. These abnormal dFC could significantly predict the symptom severity of individuals with ASD. Our findings might advance our knowledge about the potential of insular heterogeneity and dynamic characteristics in understanding the neuropathology mechanism of ASD and in developing neuroimaging biomarkers for clinical applications.
34953491|a|BACKGROUND: The operating room nurses have encountered several challenges during the current COVID-19 Pandemic, which subsequently impact their clinical performance. The present study aimed to investigate the experiences of operating room health care professionals' regarding the COVID-19 pandemic challenges in southern Iran. METHODS: This is a descriptive qualitative study. The required data were collected using in-depth and semi-structured interviews. Accordingly, 19 operating room health care professions were included in this study through purposive sampling. The data were collected from February 2020 to August 2021 and then analyzed using the Granheim and Lundman's method. RESULTS: Three main themes and 9 sub-themes were presented in this study. They included: 1- Challenges of applying protocols and standards of care in the COVID-19 pandemic in the operating room (lack of specific guidelines regarding care protocols and standards for crisis management of Covid-19 in the operating room and impossibility of keeping social distance in the operating room). 2- Professional challenges (tedious and hard work, professional burnout, lack of adequate support by the managers and lack of personal protective equipment). 3-Psychological crises (indescribable anxiety and worry, parenting stress, and weakened resilience). CONCLUSION: Based on the findings of the present study, it was indicated that lack of a specific guideline in the COVID-19 pandemic led to a sense of indecision and confusion among operating room staff. In this regard, performing tedious tasks, feelings of tiredness and exhaustion, lack of support by the authorities, and lack of access to adequate facilities and equipment were reported as the professional challenges of the healthcare staff in the current COVID-19 pandemic, which consequently affected the quality of care and patient's safety. It seems that hospital officials can use the results reported in this study for efficient planning and effective management during the COVID-19 pandemic.
34953453|a|Methylglyoxal (MG) is a highly reactive alpha-ketoaldehyde formed endogenously as a byproduct of the glycolytic pathway. To remove MG, various detoxification systems work together in vivo, including the glyoxalase system, which enzymatically degrades MG using glyoxalase 1 (GLO1) and GLO2. Recently, numerous reports have shown that GLO1 expression and MG accumulation in the brain are involved in the pathogenesis of psychiatric disorders, such as anxiety disorder, depression, autism, and schizophrenia. Furthermore, it has been reported that GLO1 inhibitors may be promising drugs for the treatment of psychiatric disorders. In this review, we discuss the recent findings of the effects of altered GLO1 function on mental behavior, especially focusing on results obtained from animal models.
34953391|a|OBJECTIVES: To examine the strengths and limitations of existing data to provide guidance for the use of folate supplements as treatment, with or without other psychotropic medications, in various psychiatric disorders. To identify area for further research in terms of the biosynthesis of mechanism of folate and genetic variants in metabolic pathway in human. METHODS: A systematic review of published literature following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines, to assess whether folate supplements are beneficial in certain psychiatric disorders (depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorder, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder). Methodology of this review is registered with Prospero (Registration number CRD 42021266605). DATA SOURCES: Eligible studies were identified using a systematic search of four electronic databases: Embase, Pubmed, PsycINFO, and Cochrane. The search strategy covered the time period from 1974 to August 16th, 2021. Therefore, this review examines randomized control trials or open-label trials completed during this period. RESULTS: We identified 23 studies of folate supplements in various psychiatric disorders for critical review. Of these, 9 studies investigated the efficacy of folate supplements in major depressive disorders, 5 studies in schizophrenia, 6 studies in autism spectrum disorder, 2 studies in bipolar affective disorder and 1 study in attention deficit hyperactive disorder. The most consistent finding association of oral levomefolic acid or 5-methylfolate with improvement in clinical outcomes in mental health conditions as mentioned above, especially in major depressive disorder (including postpartum and post-menopausal depression), schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and bipolar affective disorder. Folate supplements were well tolerated. LIMITATION: Our results are not representative of all types of studies such as case reports or case series studies, nor are they representative of the studies conducted in languages that are not in English or not translated in English. CONCLUSION: Increasing evidence from clinical trials consistently demonstrate folate supplements, especially levomefolic acid or 5-methylfolate, may improve clinical outcomes for certain psychiatric diseases, especially as an adjunct pharmacotherapy with minimal side effects.
34953140|a|Perceived personal wellbeing tends to be lower in individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD), especially in the case of women. To develop the present study, the Personal Wellbeing Index (PWI-A) was administered to a Spanish-speaking sample of women with ASD (N = 401) and self-diagnosed ASD (N = 343), women without ASD (N = 373) and men with ASD (N = 65) to compare their self-perceptions. Women with ASD showed significantly lower wellbeing rates than women in the control group for the total PWI-A and across all the domains, and there were no significant differences when compared with self-diagnosed women with ASD and men with ASD. Autism explained between 24 and 26% of the decline in the PWI-A total score, with life achievement, future security, safety and relationships being the domains most highly correlated with the total. These findings are an effective contribution to improving diagnosis and professional intervention in women with ASD.
34952663|a|
34952567|a|
34952542|a|Sex differences in the human brain emerge as early as mid-gestation and have been linked to sex hormones, particularly testosterone. Here, we analyzed the influence of markers of early sex hormone exposure (polygenic risk score (PRS) for testosterone, salivary testosterone, number of CAG repeats, digit ratios, and PRS for estradiol) on the growth pattern of cortical surface area in a longitudinal cohort of 722 infants. We found PRS for testosterone and right-hand digit ratio to be significantly associated with surface area, but only in females. PRS for testosterone at the most stringent P value threshold was positively associated with surface area development over time. Higher right-hand digit ratio, which is indicative of low prenatal testosterone levels, was negatively related to surface area in females. The current work suggests that variation in testosterone levels during both the prenatal and postnatal period may contribute to cortical surface area development in female infants.
34952304|a|BACKGROUND: Sensory over-responsivity (SOR) refers to excessively intense and/or prolonged behavioral responses to environmental stimuli typically perceived as non-aversive. SOR is prevalent in several neurodevelopmental disorders, including chronic tic disorders (CTDs) and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Few studies have examined the extent and clinical correlates of SOR across disorders, limiting insights into the phenomenon's transdiagnostic clinical and biological relevance. Such cross-disorder comparisons are of particular interest for CTDs and OCD given their frequent co-occurrence. OBJECTIVE: We sought to compare the magnitude of SOR between adults with CTD and adults with OCD and to identify the clinical factors most strongly associated with SOR across these disorders. METHODS: We enrolled 207 age- and sex-matched participants across four diagnostic categories: CTD without OCD (designated "CTD/OCD-"; n = 37), CTD with OCD ("CTD/OCD+"; n = 32), OCD without tic disorder ("OCD"; n = 69), and healthy controls (n = 69). Participants completed a self-report battery of rating scales assessing SOR (Sensory Gating Inventory, SGI), obsessive-compulsive symptoms (Dimensional Obsessive-Compulsive Scale, DOCS), inattention and hyperactivity (Adult ADHD Self-Report Screening Scale for DSM-5, ASRS-5), anxiety (Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7), and depression (Patient Health Questionnaire-9). CTD participants were also administered the Yale Global Tic Severity Scale (YGTSS). To examine between-group differences in SOR, we compared SGI score across all groups and between pairs of groups. To examine the relationship of SOR with other clinical factors, we performed multivariable linear regression. RESULTS: CTD/OCD-, CTD/OCD+, and OCD participants were 86.7%, 87.6%, and 89.5%, respectively, more likely to have higher SGI total scores than healthy controls. SGI total score did not differ between CTD/OCD-, CTD/OCD+, and OCD groups. In the regression model of log-transformed SGI total score, OCD diagnosis, DOCS score, and ASRS-5 score each contributed significantly to model goodness-of-fit, whereas CTD diagnosis and YGTSS total tic score did not. CONCLUSION: SOR is prevalent in adults with CTD and in adults with OCD but does not significantly differ in magnitude between these disorders. Across CTD, OCD, and healthy control adult populations, SOR is independently associated with both obsessive-compulsive and ADHD symptoms, suggesting a transdiagnostic relationship between these sensory and psychiatric manifestations. Future cross-disorder, longitudinal, and translational research is needed to clarify the role and prognostic import of SOR in CTDs, OCD, and other neurodevelopmental disorders.
34952255|a|Cannabidiol (CBD) has become a fast-growing avenue for research in psychiatry, and clinicians are challenged with understanding the implications of CBD for treating mental health disorders. The goal of this review is to serve as a guide for mental health professionals by providing an overview of CBD and a synthesis the current evidence within major psychiatric disorders. PubMed and PsycINFO were searched for articles containing the terms "cannabidiol" in addition to major psychiatric disorders and symptoms, yielding 2952 articles. Only randomized controlled trials or within-subject studies investigating CBD as a treatment option for psychiatric disorders (N = 16) were included in the review. Studies were reviewed for psychotic disorders (n = 6), anxiety disorders (n = 3), substance use disorders (tobacco n = 3, cannabis n = 2, opioid n = 1), and insomnia (n = 1). There were no published studies that met inclusion criteria for alcohol or stimulant use disorder, PTSD, ADHD, autism spectrum disorder, or mood disorders. Synthesis of the CBD literature indicates it is generally safe and well tolerated. The most promising preliminary findings are related to the use of CBD in psychotic symptoms and anxiety. There is currently not enough high-quality evidence to suggest the clinical use of CBD for any psychiatric disorder.
34952108|a|BACKGROUND: Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is effective for patients with treatment refractory obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is present in up to a third of all patients with OCD, but it is unknown whether effectiveness of DBS for OCD also applies for patients with comorbid ASD. The present case series is the first to examine effectiveness on OCD symptoms and safety of DBS in patients with OCD and ASD specifically. METHODS: Six consecutive patients with treatment-refractory OCD and comorbid ASD received DBS of the ventral anterior limb of the internal capsule (vALIC) or medial forebrain bundle (MFB). We examined effectiveness of DBS on symptoms of OCD and depression with the Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS) and Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D), respectively. We included qualitative data to describe the course of treatment in individual patients with OCD and ASD. RESULTS: We found that DBS significantly decreased symptoms of OCD (p < .001) and depression (p = .007). Four out of six patients with OCD and comorbid ASD were responders (decrease >= 35% in Y-BOCS), one patient was partial-responder (decrease 25-35% in Y-BOCS) and one patient did not respond (decrease <= 25% in Y-BOCS). Serious adverse events were an infection of the DBS system, and a suicide attempt. CONCLUSIONS: Though present results are preliminary, DBS reduced symptoms of OCD and depression in patients with OCD and comorbid ASD. Comorbid ASD should therefore not be seen as a contra-indication for DBS in OCD.
34951864|a|BACKGROUND: Social media has been extensively used for the communication of health-related information and consecutively for the potential spread of medical misinformation. Conventional systematic reviews have been published on this topic to identify original articles and to summarize their methodological approaches and themes. A bibliometric study could complement their findings, for instance, by evaluating the geographical distribution of the publications and if they were well cited and disseminated in high impact journals. OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to perform a bibliometric analysis of the current literature to discover the prevalent trends and topics related to medical misinformation on social media. METHODS: Web of Science Core Collection electronic database was accessed to identify relevant papers with the following search string: ALL=(misinformati* OR "wrong informati*" OR disinformati* OR "misleading informati*" OR "fake news*") AND ALL=(medic* OR illness* OR disease* OR health* OR pharma* OR drug* OR therap*) AND ALL=("social media*" OR Facebook* OR Twitter* OR Instagram* OR YouTube* OR Weibo* OR Whatsapp* OR Reddit* OR TikTok* OR WeChat*). Full records were exported to a bibliometric software, VOSviewer, to link bibliographic information with citation data. A term map and keyword maps were created to illustrate recurring terms and keywords. RESULTS: Based on the analysis of 529 papers on medical and health-related misinformation on social media, we found that the most popularly investigated social media platforms were Twitter (90), YouTube (67), and Facebook (57). Articles targeting these three platforms also had higher citations per paper (>13.7) than articles covering other social media platforms (Instagram, Weibo, Whatsapp, Reddit, and WeChat; <8.7). Moreover, social media platform-specific papers accounted for 44% of all identified publications. Investigations on these platforms had different foci. Topic preference for Twitter-based research was the investigation of cyberchondria and hypochondriasis, YouTube-based research explored tobacco smoking, whereas Facebook-based research studied vaccine hesitancy related to autism. COVID-19 was a common topic investigated across all platforms. Overall, the United States had contributions to half of all identified papers, and 80% of the top ten most productive institutions were based in this country. The identified papers were mostly published in journals of the categories public environmental and occupational health, communication, health care sciences services, medical informatics, and medicine general internal, with the top journal being the Journal of Medical Internet Research. CONCLUSIONS: There is a significant platform-specific topics preference for social media investigations on medical misinformation. With a large population of internet users from China, it may be reasonably expected that Weibo, WeChat, TikTok (and its Chinese version Douyin) would become more investigated in future studies. Currently these platforms present research gaps that leave their usage and information disseminated warranting further evaluation. Future studies should also include social platforms targeting non-English users to provide a wider global perspective.
34951556|a|Rule-governed behavior (RGB) is behavior that is controlled by verbal descriptions of contingencies rather than by direct contact or a history of direct contact with the contingencies. Humans rely on RGB to navigate a multitude of life experiences, and in doing so, we avoid direct contact with destructive or harmful contingencies or contingencies that would be inefficient to contact. However, individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) frequently struggle with RGB, leaving them at increased risk of contacting aversive consequences. As a result, acquiring RGB can be a valuable developmental outcome for individuals with ASD. The current study examined the effectiveness of an intervention program designed to promote acquisition and generalization of rule-governed social skills in children with ASD. Multiple exemplar training (MET) resulted in increased performance of the target behavior as well as successful discrimination.
34951517|a|This study evaluated the association between placental pathology and gross morphology and the risk of autism spectrum disorders (ASD). We conducted a matched case-control study of children with confirmed ASD who were born between 2000 and 2017 at one of three university-affiliated hospitals in Montreal, Quebec. Cases, who were identified through the Montreal Children's Hospital Autism Spectrum Disorders Program, were matched to babies (1:5) born at the same hospital and on the same day. Multi-fetal births were excluded. Maternal demographics, pregnancy characteristics and placental pathologies were collected from hospital charts by abstractors blind to autism diagnoses. This current study consisted of data from a single-site that had pathology reports available. Pearson chi-square and Wilcoxon rank-sum tests were used to estimate p-values. Our study consisted of 107 ASD cases and 526 matched controls. Mothers of cases and controls were similar in terms of parity, gravidity, smoking status, BMI, rates of clinical chorioamnionitis, chronic hypertension, and gestational diabetes. Age at delivery of <25 years was more common among mothers of controls. Compared with controls, cases were more likely born male, <32 weeks of gestation, and weighing <1500 g. Cases and controls had similar rates of placental inflammation, vasculitis, and other placental pathologies. There were no differences in placental weight, placental thickness, umbilical cord length, and umbilical cord insertion between the two groups. In conclusion, placental pathology and gross morphology do not appear to be associated with ASD, suggesting that any perinatal determinants of autism are not likely to be mediated through placental pathology. LAY SUMMARY: Data from a matched case-control study consisting of neonates born between 2000 and 2017 at one of three McGill-affiliated hospitals were used to examine the relationship between placental pathology and morphology and the development of autism. No differences in placental pathology and gross morphology were found between those with and without autism, which suggests that placental abnormalities are unlikely to either cause or mediate the development of autism.
34950522|a|We are presenting the case of a 38-year-old woman with nonverbal autism and intellectual disability, hospitalized in a neurobehavioural unit because of a pica behaviour for 3 years. During the hospitalization, the patient presented an episode of pain, agitation, restlessness, rhabdomyolysis, coma, tachycardia, hyperthermia, shivering, and diarrhoea. The main hypothesis raised was tramadol overdose because of the immediate antidote response to the injection of naloxone 0,4 mg/mL. Even if we did not exceed the recommended prescription dosage of tramadol, the presence of gastric bezoar slowed the absorption of the drug, and the consequence was an opioid overdose and serotonin syndrome.
34950225|a|A direct observation strategy (Standardized Observation Analogue Procedure, SOAP) was used in a large-scale randomized trial of parent training versus parent education in young children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and disruptive behavior. The 16-minute SOAP, modified from an earlier version of this same measure, included parentchild interaction to assess child behavior in a clinical laboratory setting. Despite study entry criteria for all child participants requiring moderate levels of disruptive behavior in this project, 126 of 168 children with complete SOAP data at baseline showed no disruptive behavior on this measure. Although the primary purpose of the study was to determine whether the SOAP could detect differences between the two conditions (i.e.,parent training (PT) and parent education (PE)), baseline observation data was not consistent with parent ratings at baseline or subsequent follow up visits, leaving little room to demonstrate improvement with this observation measure. This and the challenging, time-consuming and resource intensive effort involved in using such a measure in a large randomized scale trial, raises fundamental questions about the validity of the SOAP as an outcome measure in such a study. Further consideration related to the feasibility and practicality of using direct observation as a primary measure in larger scale efforts overall are also discussed.
34950076|a|Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) show difficulties in social communication behaviors, emotion regulation and daily living skills, and they frequently present with challenging behaviors. In parents of children with ASD, higher rates of stress and mental health problems have been reported than in parents of either typically developing children or children with other conditions. In this study, we tested whether maternal well-being changes with improved social communicative behaviors of children with ASD receiving early intervention. We examined developmental changes in 72 pre-schoolers and stress levels in their mothers (measured by the Parental Stress Inventory) before and after a 12-month community-based intervention program based on the Early Start Denver Model, a naturalistic developmental behavioral intervention targeting social communication. Multiple regression analyses showed that maternal child-related stress was predicted by changes in children's social communication behaviors (measured with the Pervasive Developmental Disorder Behavior Inventory). Gains in the early social communication behavior domain were the strongest predictor of post-intervention child-related maternal stress, surpassing adaptive behavior, language and non-verbal cognitive gains, and reduction in challenging behavior. These findings support the hypothesis that, in children with ASD, the acquisition of social communication behaviors contribute to improvements in maternal well-being.
34949605|a|OBJECTIVES: To the best of our knowledge, no case-control study on child and adolescent psychiatric outpatients has investigated the clinical characteristics of patients with child-to-parent violence (CPV). The current study aimed to evaluate the clinical characteristics of child and adolescent psychiatric patients with CPV. SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: This research included child and adolescent psychiatric patients who were aged 10-15 years during their initial consultation. The participants were allocated to one of two groups: children with CPV (CPV group, n=109) and without CPV (non-CPV group, n=713). OUTCOME MEASURES: This study analysed data including age, sex, diagnostic classification of the primary diagnosis, antisocial behaviour, suicidal attempt or self-harm and refusal to attend school. Moreover, a history of abuse by parents was investigated. Psychological rating scales such as the Spence Children's Anxiety Scale, Depression Self-Rating Scale for Children, Tokyo Autistic Behavior Scale, Attention-deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder-Rating Scale and Oppositional Defiant Behavior Inventory were used. RESULTS: Of 822 patients who sought consultation in our department, 109 (13.26%) were included in the CPV group during the first consultation. Compared with the non-CPV group, the CPV group had significantly higher proportions of patients who experienced physical abuse, psychological abuse and who witnessed violence between parents. Meanwhile, the proportion of patients with neurodevelopmental disorders was significantly higher in the CPV group than in the non-CPV group. Regarding developmental characteristics, impulsivity might be correlated with CPV. Moreover, violence and behavioural problems outside of home were associated with CPV. CONCLUSIONS: In patients with CPV who sought consultation, the findings of the current study should be considered to understand invisible side and to facilitate the use of appropriate treatment approaches. However, a prospective study should be performed to investigate the causality between CPV and clinical characteristics.
34949508|a|INTRODUCTION: Youth with special healthcare needs have low rates of healthcare transition services, which can affect lifelong functioning and quality of life. This study examines the variations in receipt of healthcare transition services among youth with special healthcare needs. METHODS: Data from the 2016-2018 National Survey of Children's Health (N=102,341) were analyzed in 2021. Receipt of healthcare transition services by youth with select health conditions was compared with youth with other special healthcare needs. Bivariate and multivariable analyses assessed the associations between the receipt of healthcare transition services, sociodemographic characteristics, and health conditions. RESULTS: Among youth with special healthcare needs, the prevalence of receiving healthcare transition services was lowest among youth with speech or other language disorders (8.5%), intellectual disabilities (9.4%), and autism spectrum disorder (11.1%). Low prevalence of receiving healthcare transition services was also observed for youth with developmental delays (12.6%), learning disabilities (14.2%), and behavior or conduct problems (15.5%). Youth with developmental delays (AOR=0.70, 95% CI=0.52, 0.95), intellectual disabilities (AOR=0.45, 95% CI=0.26, 0.78), learning disabilities (AOR=0.77, 95% CI=0.60, 0.99), autism spectrum disorder (AOR=0.60, 95% CI=0.41, 0.86), and speech or other language disorders (AOR=0.48, 95% CI=0.32, 0.72) had lower odds of receiving healthcare transition services than youth with other special healthcare needs. CONCLUSIONS: Findings suggest that the receipt of healthcare transition services varies substantially by the type of chronic health condition and highlight the need for increased healthcare transition services for youth with special healthcare needs, especially for youth with neurodevelopmental disabilities and speech or other language disorders.
34949323|a|OBJECTIVE: To study the relationship between folic acid and 25-hydroxy vitamin D[25(OH)D] and intelligence and core symptoms in children with autism. METHODS: A total of 124 children with autism aged 3-6 years who were admitted to The Fouth Affiliated Hospital of Qiqihar Medical College from March 2018 to March 2021 were enrolled as the case group, and 120 healthy children who underwent physical examination in hospital during the same period were selected as the control group. Respectively in the hospital the same day or physical examination on two groups of children fasting venous blood collected 4 mL, let stand centrifugal after processing into-80 C refrigerator, using chemiluminescence immunoassay and high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry detection of two groups of children folic acid and serum 25(OH)D level, using enzyme-linked immunosorbent method to detect the serum level of folic acid metabolites. For the children in the case group and the control group, the Wechsler scale for early childhood and child intelligence(WISC) was used to assess intelligence. Core symptoms of autism were assessed using the behavior scale for autistic children(ABC). T test was used to compare serum folic acid and 25(OH)D levels, WISC and ABC scale scores between the case group and the control group. Pearson correlation analysis was conducted to determine the relationship between serum folic acid, 25(OH)D level and intelligence and core symptoms in children with autism. RESULTS: The serum folic acid and 25(OH)D levels in the case group were(16.13+-4.26) ng/mL and(25.78+-3.24) ng/mL respectively, which were lower than those in the control group(21.58+-5.37) ng/mL and(36.94+-6.11) ng/mL, with statistical significance(all P<0.05). The WISC scale score of the case group was(62.83+-11.73) points, lower than that of the control group(89.42+-12.58) points, while the ABC scale score was(77.39+-10.28) points, higher than that of the control group(42.30+-5.87) points, with statistical significance(all P<0.05). Pearson correlation analysis showed that serum folic acid and 25(OH)D levels were positively correlated with WISC score(r=0.512, 0.584; P=0.012, 0.001), and was negatively correlated with ABC scale score(r=-0.546, -0.602; P=0.008, <0.001). The serum THFA and 5-MTHF levels in the case group were(3.85+-1.22) ng/mL and(4.84+-1.32) ng/mL respectively, which were lower than those in the control group(4.30+-1.51) ng/mL and(5.34+-1.34) ng/mL respectively. The serum FRAA level was(433.29+-74.34) pg/mL, higher than that of the control group(402.10+-65.87) pg/mL, with statistical significance(all P<0.05). CONCLUSION: The serum folic acid and 25(OH)D levels are lower in children with autism, and are closely related to the intelligence and core symptoms of the children, that is, with the decline of the two serological indicators, the lower the intelligence of children with autism, and the more obvious the core symptoms.
34949210|a|BACKGROUND: Disruption of the Neurobeachin gene is a rare genetic mutation that has been implicated in the development of autism and enhanced long-term potentiation of the hippocampal CA1 region, causing a heightened conditioned fear response and impaired fear extinction. Prazosin, an alpha-1 receptor antagonist, has been used in patients with posttraumatic stress disorder to mitigate the increased alpha-1 activity involved in fear and startle responses. Here we report a case of a patient with a rare Neurobeachin gene deletion, who demonstrated marked and sustained improvement in paranoid behavior within days of prazosin initiation. CASE PRESENTATION: The patient is a 27-year-old White male with autism spectrum disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and schizophrenia, with a chromosome 13q12 deletion including deletion of the Neurobeachin gene, who presented to the emergency department due to worsening functional status and profound weight loss as a result of only eating prepackaged foods. He had not showered or changed clothes in several months prior to presentation. He was hospitalized in the inpatient psychiatric unit for 2 months before prazosin was initiated. During that time, he demonstrated paranoia as evidenced by heightened sensitivity to doors opening, guarded interactions, and limited communication with providers and other patients. He also exhibited poor grooming habits, with aversion to showering, shaving, and changing clothes. Since initiating prazosin, he has demonstrated a brighter affect, initiates and maintains conversations, showers and changes clothes on a regular basis, and eats a variety of foods. At the time of this report, the patient was discharged to live in an apartment with a caregiver after a 7-month inpatient hospitalization. CONCLUSIONS: Low-dose prazosin shows rapid and sustained improvement in paranoid behavior in a patient with a rare Neurobeachin gene deletion. Prazosin has a relatively favorable side effect profile with once-daily dosing and low cost. Prazosin may provide clinical improvement in patients with Neurobeachin gene deletions due to its theoretical attenuation in fear response through alpha-1 antagonism.
34948881|a|Recognizing a person's identity is a fundamental social ability; facial expressions, in particular, are extremely important in social cognition. Individuals affected by autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) display impairment in the recognition of emotions and, consequently, in recognizing expressions related to emotions, and even their identity. The aim of our study was to compare the performance of participants with ADHD, ASD, and typical development (TD) with regard to both accuracy and speed in the morphing task and to determine whether the use of pictures of digitized cartoon faces could significantly facilitate the process of emotion recognition in ASD patients (particularly for disgust). This study investigated the emotion recognition process through the use of dynamic pictures (human faces vs. cartoon faces) created with the morphing technique in three pediatric populations (7-12 years old): ADHD patients, ASD patients, and an age-matched control sample (TD). The Chi-square test was used to compare response latency and accuracy between the three groups in order to determine if there were statistically significant differences (p < 0.05) in the recognition of basic emotions. The results demonstrated a faster response time in neurotypical children compared to ASD and ADHD children, with ADHD participants performing better than ASD participants on the same task. The overall accuracy parameter between the ADHD and ASD groups did not significantly differ.
34948805|a|The inclusion of students with autism in physical education (PE) curricula has become a global trend. Although the self-efficacy of PE teachers has been identified as a major factor supporting the successful implementation of inclusive PE, limited research exists on this area in non-Western societies, especially Saudi Arabia. To address this paucity, the present study aimed (1) to determine the level of self-efficacy among PE teachers in Saudi Arabia toward including students with autism in PE classes via investigating specific independent variables; and (2) to identify the predictors of Saudi PE teachers' self-efficacy toward including students with autism. A total of 214 Saudi PE teachers (male n = 188; female n = 26; mean age = 41.07 years) participated in this study. Self-efficacy level toward including students with autism was measured using the Arabic version of the Physical Educators' Self-Efficacy Towards Including Students with Disabilities-Autism (PESEISD-A) instrument. Statistical analysis revealed that PE teachers had a moderate level (M = 4.51, SD = 2.04) of self-efficacy toward including students with autism in PE classes. Multiple linear regression analysis indicated that age and feelings of preparedness of the teachers were significant predictors (beta = -0.297; p = 0.012; beta = 0.178; p = 0.012, respectively) of their self-efficacy toward including students with autism in PE classes. The findings highlight the need for continued efforts to improve Saudi PE teachers' level of self-efficacy and preparedness towards successfully including students with autism.
34948647|a|Although autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a common developmental disorder, primary healthcare providers show a deficit in providing early diagnosis. To understand parents' experience and perspective in the diagnosis and intervention process of their children, a survey was deployed through social media to parents' with at least one child diagnosed with ASD. The survey included parents experience, satisfaction and perception in the diagnosis process and services provided for their children, stigma and type of support received. A total of 223 participants were enrolled. Although 62% of ASD patients were diagnosed by three years old, most diagnoses (66%) were non-physician initiated. Additionally, 40.8% of the parents reported that the services required for their child are available in their area of residence, but only 7.9% were satisfied with these services. Parents who received psychological support (9.9%) started early intervention, and their children have a better prognosis (p <= 0.005). Stigmatized parents were more likely to delay intervention (p <= 0.005). Parents' perception is to have qualified healthcare and educational professionals experienced in ASD. Our findings suggest that a specialized family-centred medical home for ASD patients would significantly benefit ASD patients, increase parents' satisfaction, reduce parents' stress, and ease their children's transition to adolescents.
34948523|a|Parents of children with ASD experience a higher incidence of mental health difficulties, including stress, depression, and anxiety, than parents of children without ASD. According to studies related to ASD, parent-child physical activity programs are an effective approach to encourage both parents and their children with ASD to exercise together, thus improving the mental health of parents due to this interactive family activity. The purpose of the present study was to explore the effects of this web-based parent-child physical activity program on the mental health of parents of children with ASD. A total of 94 parent-child pairs consented to participate in this study, and 75 parent-child pairs completed the study. Three instruments-DASS-21, PSI-4-SF, and WHOQOL-26-were used to measure mental health, parental stress, and quality of life, respectively. A randomized controlled trial design was implemented to examine the effectiveness of the 10-week web-based parent-child physical activity program on improving the mental health of parents of children with ASD. The results showed that after the 10-week parent-child physical activity program, there were significant differences in overall DASS-21 and PSI-4-SF for the experimental group, compared with control group (p < 0.05), which indicated that the parent-child physical activity program has a positive influence on mental health in parents of children with ASD. One sub-area of WHOQOL-26 between the experimental and control groups across pre-/post-testing intervals also showed greater reductions in the item of psychological health (p < 0.05). In conclusion, the findings demonstrated the efficacy of the web-based parent-child physical activity program for improving mental health in parents of children with ASD.
34948243|a|Intellectual disability (ID) is characterized by impairments in the cognitive processes and in the tasks of daily life. It encompasses a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of neurodevelopmental disorders often associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Social and communication abilities are strongly compromised in ASD. The prevalence of ID/ASD is 1-3%, and approximately 30% of the patients remain without a molecular diagnosis. Considering the extreme genetic locus heterogeneity, next-generation sequencing approaches have provided powerful tools for candidate gene identification. Molecular diagnosis is crucial to improve outcome, prevent complications, and hopefully start a therapeutic approach. Here, we performed parent-offspring trio whole-exome sequencing (WES) in a cohort of 60 mostly syndromic ID/ASD patients and we detected 8 pathogenic variants in genes already known to be associated with ID/ASD (SYNGAP1, SMAD6, PACS1, SHANK3, KMT2A, KCNQ2, ACTB, and POGZ). We found four de novo disruptive variants of four novel candidate ASD/ID genes: MBP, PCDHA1, PCDH15, PDPR. We additionally selected via bioinformatic tools many variants in unknown genes that alone or in combination can contribute to the phenotype. In conclusion, our data confirm the efficacy of WES in detecting pathogenic variants of known and novel ID/ASD genes.
34947998|a|Bisphenol A (BPA) is an environmental risk factor for autism spectrum disorder (ASD). BPA exposure dysregulates ASD-related genes in the hippocampus and neurological functions of offspring. However, whether prenatal BPA exposure has an impact on genes in the prefrontal cortex, another brain region highly implicated in ASD, and through what mechanisms have not been investigated. Here, we demonstrated that prenatal BPA exposure disrupts the transcriptome-interactome profiles of the prefrontal cortex of neonatal rats. Interestingly, the list of BPA-responsive genes was significantly enriched with known ASD candidate genes, as well as genes that were dysregulated in the postmortem brain tissues of ASD cases from multiple independent studies. Moreover, several differentially expressed genes in the offspring's prefrontal cortex were the targets of ASD-related transcription factors, including AR, ESR1, and RORA. The hypergeometric distribution analysis revealed that BPA may regulate the expression of such genes through these transcription factors in a sex-dependent manner. The molecular docking analysis of BPA and ASD-related transcription factors revealed novel potential targets of BPA, including RORA, SOX5, TCF4, and YY1. Our findings indicated that prenatal BPA exposure disrupts ASD-related genes in the offspring's prefrontal cortex and may increase the risk of ASD through sex-dependent molecular mechanisms, which should be investigated further.
34947986|a|Rare mutations associated with schizophrenia (SZ) and bipolar disorder (BD) usually have high clinical penetrance; however, they are highly heterogeneous and personalized. Identifying rare mutations is instrumental in making the molecular diagnosis, understanding the pathogenesis, and providing genetic counseling for the affected individuals and families. We conducted whole-genome sequencing analysis in two multiplex families with the dominant inheritance of SZ and BD. We detected a G327E mutation of SCN9A and an A654V mutation of DPP4 cosegregating with SZ and BD in one three-generation multiplex family. We also identified three mutations cosegregating with SZ and BD in another two-generation multiplex family, including L711S of SCN9A, M4554I of ABCA13, and P159L of SYT14. These five missense mutations were rare and deleterious. Mutations of SCN9A have initially been reported to cause congenital insensitivity to pain and neuropathic pain syndromes. Further studies showed that rare mutations of SCN9A were associated with seizure and autism spectrum disorders. Our findings suggest that SZ and BD might also be part of the clinical phenotype spectra of SCN9A mutations. Our study also indicates the oligogenic involvement in SZ and BD and supports the multiple-hit model of SZ and BD.
34947895|a|Statins are widely accepted as first-choice agents for the prevention of lipid-related cardiovascular diseases. These drugs have both anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant properties, which may also make them effective as potential treatment marked by perturbations in these pathways, such as some neuropsychiatric disorders. In this narrative review, we have investigated the effects of statin therapy in individuals suffering from major depressive disorder (MDD), schizophrenia, anxiety, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), bipolar disorder (BD), delirium, and autism spectrum disorders using a broad online search of electronic databases. We also explored the adverse effects of these drugs to obtain insights into the benefits and risks associated with their use in the treatment of these disorders. Lipophilic statins (including simvastatin) because of better brain penetrance may have greater protective effects against MDD and schizophrenia. The significant positive effects of statins in the treatment of anxiety disorders without any serious adverse side effects were shown in numerous studies. In OCD, BD, and delirium, limitations, and contradictions in the available data make it difficult to draw conclusions on any positive effect of statins. The positive effects of simvastatin in autism disorders have been evaluated in only a small number of clinical trials. Although some studies showed positive effect of statins in some neuropsychiatric disorders, further prospective studies are needed to confirm this and define the most effective doses and treatment durations.
34946972|a|The neuroanatomy of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) shows highly heterogeneous developmental trajectories across individuals. Mapping atypical brain development onto clinical phenotypes, and establishing their molecular underpinnings, is therefore crucial for patient stratification and subtyping. In this longitudinal study we examined intra- and inter-individual differences in the developmental trajectory of cortical thickness (CT) in childhood and adolescence, and their genomic underpinnings, in 33 individuals with ASD and 37 typically developing controls (aged 11-18 years). Moreover, we aimed to link regional atypical CT development to intra-individual variations in restricted and repetitive behavior (RRB) over a two-year time period. Individuals with ASD showed significantly reduced cortical thinning in several of the brain regions functionally related to wider autism symptoms and traits (e.g., fronto-temporal and cingulate cortices). The spatial patterns of the neuroanatomical differences in CT were enriched for genes known to be associated with ASD at a genetic and transcriptomic level. Further, intra-individual differences in CT correlated with within-subject variability in the severity of RRBs. Our findings represent an important step towards characterizing the neuroanatomical underpinnings of ASD across development based upon measures of CT. Moreover, our findings provide important novel insights into the link between microscopic and macroscopic pathology in ASD, as well as their relationship with different clinical ASD phenotypes.
34946857|a|Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common form of inherited intellectual disability and autism caused by the instability of a CGG trinucleotide repeat in exon 1 of the FMR1 gene. The co-occurrence of FXS with other genetic disorders has only been occasionally reported. Here, we describe three independent cases of FXS co-segregation with three different genetic conditions, consisting of Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), PPP2R5D--related neurodevelopmental disorder, and 2p25.3 deletion. The co-occurrence of DMD and FXS has been reported only once in a young boy, while in an independent family two affected boys were described, the elder diagnosed with FXS and the younger with DMD. This represents the second case in which both conditions coexist in a 5-year-old boy, inherited from his heterozygous mother. The next double diagnosis had never been reported before: through exome sequencing, a girl with FXS who was of 7 years of age with macrocephaly and severe psychomotor delay was found to carry a de novo variant in the PPP2R5D gene. Finally, a maternally inherited 2p25.3 deletion associated with a decreased level of the MYT1L transcript, only in the patient, was observed in a 33-year-old FXS male with severe seizures compared to his mother and two sex- and age-matched controls. All of these patients represent very rare instances of genetic conditions with clinical features that can be modified by FXS and vice versa.
34946850|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder that impedes patients' cognition, social, speech and communication skills. ASD is highly heterogeneous with a variety of etiologies and clinical manifestations. The prevalence rate of ASD increased steadily in recent years. Presently, molecular mechanisms underlying ASD occurrence and development remain to be elucidated. Here, we integrated multi-layer genomics data to investigate the transcriptome and pathway dysregulations in ASD development. The RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) expression profiles of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), neural progenitor cells (NPCs) and neuron cells from ASD and normal samples were compared in our study. We found that substantially more genes were differentially expressed in the NPCs than the iPSCs. Consistently, gene set variation analysis revealed that the activity of the known ASD pathways in NPCs and neural cells were significantly different from the iPSCs, suggesting that ASD occurred at the early stage of neural system development. We further constructed comprehensive brain- and neural-specific regulatory networks by incorporating transcription factor (TF) and gene interactions with long 5 non-coding RNA(lncRNA) and protein interactions. We then overlaid the transcriptomes of different cell types on the regulatory networks to infer the regulatory cascades. The variations of the regulatory cascades between ASD and normal samples uncovered a set of novel disease-associated genes and gene interactions, particularly highlighting the functional roles of ELF3 and the interaction between STAT1 and lncRNA ELF3-AS 1 in the disease development. These new findings extend our understanding of ASD and offer putative new therapeutic targets for further studies.
34946184|a|Bacteria in the gut microbiome plays an intrinsic part in immune activation, intestinal permeability, enteric reflex, and entero-endocrine signaling. Apart from physiological and structural changes brought about by gut bacteria on entero-epithelial cells and mucus layers, a vast number of signals generated in the gastro-intestinal tract (GIT) reaches the brain via the vagus nerve. Research on the gut-brain axis (GBA) has mostly been devoted to digestive functions and satiety. Less papers have been published on the role gut microbiota play in mood, cognitive behavior and neuropsychiatric disorders such as autism, depression and schizophrenia. Whether we will be able to fully decipher the connection between gut microbiota and mental health is debatable, especially since the gut microbiome is diverse, everchanging and highly responsive to external stimuli. Nevertheless, the more we discover about the gut microbiome and the more we learn about the GBA, the greater the chance of developing novel therapeutics, probiotics and psychobiotics to treat gastro-intestinal disorders such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), but also improve cognitive functions and prevent or treat mental disorders. In this review we focus on the influence gut bacteria and their metabolites have on neuropsychiatric disorders.
34946159|a|The sulphate-reducing bacteria (SRB) of genus Desulfovibrio are a group of prokaryotes associated with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). The connection between the elevated numbers of Desulfovibrio in the gut of children with ASD compared with healthy children remains unresolved. A conceivable consequence of SRB overgrowth in the gut is the conversion of bioavailable iron into low-soluble crystalline iron sulphides, causing iron deficiency in the organism. In this study, we report the draft genome sequence and physiological features of the first cultivable isolate from a patient with ASD, Desulfovibrio desulfuricans strain AY5.The capability of the strain to produce crystalline iron sulphides was studied under different pH conditions. The most notable greigite(Fe3S4) and pyrite (FeS2) formation was revealed at pH 6.0, which suggests that the iron loss due to insoluble sulphide formation may occur in the proximal part of the gastrointestinal tract. Strain AY5 was adapted to grow under nitrogen-limiting conditions by N2 fixation. The urease found in the strain's genome may play a role in resistance to acidic pH.
34945779|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is associated with anxiety and sleep problems. We investigated transdermal electrical neuromodulation (TEN) of the cervical nerves in the neck as a safe, effective, comfortable and non-pharmacological therapy for decreasing anxiety and enhancing sleep quality in ASD. METHODS: In this blinded, sham-controlled study, seven adolescents and young adults with high-functioning ASD underwent five consecutive treatment days, one day of the sham followed by four days of subthreshold TEN for 20 min. Anxiety-provoking cognitive tasks were performed after the sham/TEN. Measures of autonomic nervous system activity, including saliva alpha-amylase and cortisol, electrodermal activity, and heart rate variability, were collected from six participants. RESULTS: Self-rated and caretaker-rated measures of anxiety were significantly improved with TEN treatment as compared to the sham, with effect sizes ranging from medium to large depending on the rating scale. Sleep scores from caretaker questionnaires also improved, but not significantly. Performance on two of the three anxiety-provoking cognitive tasks and heart rate variability significantly improved with TEN stimulation as compared to the sham. Four of the seven (57%) participants were responders, defined as a >= 30% improvement in self-reported anxiety. Salivary alpha-amylase decreased with more TEN sessions and decreased from the beginning to the end of the session on TEN days for responders. TEN was well-tolerated without significant adverse events. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides preliminary evidence that TEN is well-tolerated in individuals with ASD and can improve anxiety.
34945775|a|PURPOSE: Informed consent for genetic testing has historically been acquired during pretest genetic counseling, without specific guidance defining which core concepts are required. METHODS: The Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen) Consent and Disclosure Recommendations Workgroup (CADRe) used an expert consensus process to identify the core concepts essential to consent for clinical genetic testing. A literature review identified 77 concepts that are included in informed consent for genetic tests. Twenty-five experts (9 medical geneticists, 8 genetic counselors, and 9 bioethicists) completed two rounds of surveys ranking concepts' importance to informed consent. RESULTS: The most highly ranked concepts included: (1) genetic testing is voluntary; (2) why is the test recommended and what does it test for?; (3) what results will be returned and to whom?; (4) are there other types of potential results, and what choices exist?; (5) how will the prognosis and management be impacted by results?; (6) what is the potential family impact?; (7) what are the test limitations and next steps?; and (8) potential risk of genetic discrimination and legal protections. CONCLUSION: Defining the core concepts necessary for informed consent for genetic testing provides a foundation for quality patient care across a variety of healthcare providers and clinical indications.
34945726|a|Schizophrenia is a complex genetic disorder involving many common variants with modest effects and rare mutations with high penetrance. Rare mutations associated with schizophrenia are highly heterogeneous and private for affected individuals and families. Identifying such mutations can help establish the molecular diagnosis, elucidate the pathogenesis, and provide helpful genetic counseling for affected patients and families. We performed a whole-exome sequencing analysis to search for rare pathogenic mutations co-segregating with schizophrenia transmitted in a dominant inheritance in a two-generation multiplex family. We identified a rare missense mutation H1574R (Histidine1574Arginine, rs199796552) of KMT2C (lysine methyltransferase 2C) co-segregating with affected members in this family. The mutation is a novel deleterious mutation of KMT2C, not reported before in the literature. The KMT2C encodes a histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4)-specific methyltransferase and involves epigenetic regulation of brain gene expression. Mutations of KMT2C have been found in neurodevelopmental disorders, such as Kleefstra syndrome, intellectual disability, and autism spectrum disorders. Our finding suggests that schizophrenia might be one of the clinical phenotype spectra of KMT2C mutations, and KMT2C might be a novel risk gene for schizophrenia. Nevertheless, the co-segregation of this mutation with schizophrenia in this family might also be due to chance; functional assays of this mutation are needed to address this issue.
34945423|a|Mental disorders have high prevalence, but the efficacy of existing therapeutics is limited, in part, because the pathogenic mechanisms remain enigmatic. Current models of neural circuitry include animal models and post-mortem brain tissue, which have allowed enormous progress in understanding the pathophysiology of mental disorders. However, these models limit the ability to assess the functional alterations in short-range and long-range network connectivity between brain regions that are implicated in many mental disorders, e.g., schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders. This work addresses these limitations by developing an in vitro model of the human brain that models the in vivo cerebral tract environment. In this study, microfabrication and stem cell differentiation techniques were combined to develop an in vitro cerebral tract model that anchors human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cerebral organoids (COs) and provides a scaffold to promote the formation of a functional connecting neuronal tract. Two designs of a Cerebral Organoid Connectivity Apparatus (COCA) were fabricated using SU-8 photoresist. The first design contains a series of spikes which anchor the CO to the COCA (spiked design), whereas the second design contains flat supporting structures with open holes in a grid pattern to anchor the organoids (grid design); both designs allow effective media exchange. Morphological and functional analyses reveal the expression of key neuronal markers as well as functional activity and signal propagation along cerebral tracts connecting CO pairs. The reported in vitro models enable the investigation of critical neural circuitry involved in neurodevelopmental processes and has the potential to help devise personalized and targeted therapeutic strategies.
34943958|a|Direct reprogramming is an appealing strategy to generate neurons from a somatic cell by forced expression of transcription factors. The generated neurons can be used for both cell replacement strategies and disease modelling. Using this technique, previous studies have shown that gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) expressing interneurons can be generated from different cell sources, such as glia cells or fetal fibroblasts. Nevertheless, the generation of neurons from adult human fibroblasts, an easily accessible cell source to obtain patient-derived neurons, has proved to be challenging due to the intrinsic blockade of neuronal commitment. In this paper, we used an optimized protocol for adult skin fibroblast reprogramming based on RE1 Silencing Transcription Factor (REST) inhibition together with a combination of GABAergic fate determinants to convert human adult skin fibroblasts into GABAergic neurons. Our results show a successful conversion in 25 days with upregulation of neuronal gene and protein expression levels. Moreover, we identified specific gene combinations that converted fibroblasts into neurons of a GABAergic interneuronal fate. Despite the well-known difficulty in converting adult fibroblasts into functional neurons in vitro, we could detect functional maturation in the induced neurons. GABAergic interneurons have relevance for cognitive impairments and brain disorders, such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, epilepsy, schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders.
34943821|a|Although circadian rhythms are thought to be essential for maintaining body health, the effects of chronic circadian disruption during neurodevelopment remain elusive. Here, using the "Short Day" (SD) mouse model, in which an 8 h/8 h light/dark (LD) cycle was applied from embryonic day 1 to postnatal day 42, we investigated the molecular and behavioral changes after circadian disruption in mice. Adult SD mice fully entrained to the 8 h/8 h LD cycle, and the circadian oscillations of the clock proteins, PERIOD1 and PERIOD2, were disrupted in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and the hippocampus of these mice. By RNA-seq widespread changes were identified in the hippocampal transcriptome, which are functionally associated with neurodevelopment, translational control, and autism. By western blotting and immunostaining hyperactivation of the mTOR and MAPK signaling pathways and enhanced global protein synthesis were found in the hippocampi of SD mice. Electrophysiological recording uncovered enhanced excitatory, but attenuated inhibitory, synaptic transmission in the hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons. These functional changes at synapses were corroborated by the immature morphology of the dendritic spines in these neurons. Lastly, autistic-like animal behavioral changes, including impaired social interaction and communication, increased repetitive behaviors, and impaired novel object recognition and location memory, were found in SD mice. Together, these results demonstrate molecular, cellular, and behavioral changes in SD mice, all of which resemble autistic-like phenotypes caused by circadian rhythm disruption. The findings highlight a critical role for circadian rhythms in neurodevelopment.
34943640|a|Dopaminergic signaling is believed to be related to autistic traits. We conducted an exploratory 3,4-dihydroxy-6-[18F]-fluoro-L-phenylalanine positron emission tomography/computed tomography ([18F]-FDOPA PET/CT) study, to examine cerebral [18F]-FDOPA influx constant (kicer min-1), reflecting predominantly striatal dopamine synthesis capacity and a mixed monoaminergic innervation in extrastriatal neurons, in 44 adults diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and 22 controls, aged 18 to 30 years. Autistic traits were assessed with the Autism Spectrum Quotient (AQ). Region-of-interest and voxel-based analyses showed no statistically significant differences in kicer between autistic adults and controls. In autistic adults, striatal kicer was significantly, negatively associated with AQ attention to detail subscale scores, although Bayesian analyses did not support this finding. In conclusion, among autistic adults, specific autistic traits can be associated with reduced striatal dopamine synthesis capacity. However, replication of this finding is necessary.
34943397|a|Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) is a rare, life-threatening, idiosyncratic adverse reaction to antipsychotic drugs. Despite the increasing rates in the prescription of antipsychotics in pediatric patients with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), little is known about the occurrence and hallmarks of NMS in this specific population. NMS appears to be part of the larger catatonia domain, based on the frequent relationship between ASD and catatonia, on the shared, when not overlapping, clinical features with malignant catatonia, and on the effectiveness of catatonia treatments on the NMS/MC symptoms. The intrinsic difficulties of exploring NMS in ASD in controlled studies accounts for the subsequent lack of available information. Based on recent reports and on our case report, clinical features of NMS in the pediatric ASD population appear to be the same as the non-ASD population. Further studies are needed to confirm these results.
34943347|a|The latest research is attempting to define whether there may be an association between maternal Perinatal Depression (PD), the use of psychotropic medications during pregnancy, and a higher risk of neurodevelopmental disorders in children, including Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). A better understanding of the relation between PD and ASD is a key element to develop early interventions. This study has been developed in the context of the SOS MOOD project. Its aim is to evaluate the possible impact of maternal PD on the child's cognitive and behavioral phenotype with a focus on ASD. Women included in the project were screened during pregnancy (1st, 2nd trimester) for PD-categorized as affected or not-and if necessary were prescribed pharmacological therapy; offspring of both groups of women underwent at a mean age of 43 months a standardized neuropsychiatric evaluation of developmental and cognitive skills, behavioral problems, autism symptoms and parental stress. Preliminary results on 59 women and 59 children do not suggest significant long-term effects of maternal PD on offspring's development and behavior. Nonetheless further studies on wider samples are necessary in order to confirm such results and disentangle the role of possible confounding factors associated to the maternal illness.
34943302|a|Stereotyped vocal behavior exhibited by a seven-year-old child diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder and maintained by automatic reinforcement was placed under stimulus control through discrimination training. The training consisted of matching a green card (SD) with free access to vocal stereotypy and a red card (SD-absent) with interruption of stereotypy and vocal redirection. At the same time, appropriate behaviors were reinforced. After discrimination training, the child rarely engaged in vocal stereotypy in the red card condition and, to a greater extent, in the green card condition, demonstrating the ability to discriminate between the two different situations. After the training, the intervention began. Once they reached the latency criterion in the red stimulus condition, the child could have free access to vocal stereotypy (green card condition). The latency criterion for engaging in stereotypy was gradually increased during the red card condition and progressively decreased during the green card condition. The intervention follows a changing criterion design. This study indicates that stimulus discrimination training is a useful intervention to reduce vocal stereotypy in an autistic child.
34943296|a|To explore the impact of social and relational adversity on access to key health services among US children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD), cross-sectional analyses of the 2016-2019 National Survey of Children's Health assessed use of key health services by children with ASD, accounting for differences in demographic characteristics, medical needs, and experience of social and relational adversities. sUS children with ASD were more than twice as likely as peers without ASD to report two or more social adversities and more than three times as likely to report two or more relational adversities. In multivariable models, relational adversities were significantly associated with greater odds of medication use for ASD (OR 1.50, 95%CI:1.02, 2.17). Social adversities were neither associated with receipt of behavioral therapies nor prescription of medication to treat ASD. Screening for various forms of adversity among youth with ASD is of great importance; even one adverse experience may be enough to influence care of a child with ASD, with differences in effect according to the nature of the particular adversity. Further research should evaluate the role that childhood adversity plays in physical and mental health outcomes in ASD.
34942953|a|The purpose of this study is to investigate the vocalization characteristics of infants with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in the context of frustration. The duration and frequency of vocalization in 48 infants with ASD and 65 infants with typical development (TD) were followed up to 24 months later for subsequent diagnosis. The typical vocalizations of infants with ASD were retrospectively analyzed, such as speech-like vocalizations, nonspeech vocalizations, vocalizations towards the person and non-social vocalizations. The results showed that, compared with the TD group, vocalizations of infants with ASD during the still-face period had lower typical vocalizations and characteristics associated with social intention, and that these characteristics were closely related to the clinical symptoms of ASD, among which vocalizations towards the person accompanied by social intention had discriminative efficacy.
34942909|a|High Intellectual Potential (HIP) and High Functioning Autism (HFA) are two different conditions sharing some clinical and neurobiological features. The aim of the present study was to characterize a sample of HIP children (n: 16; M/F: 14/2; median age: 10 years) in comparison to those with HFA (n: 17; M/F: 16/1; median age: 13 years) and to neurotypically developed (NTD) children (n: 10; M/F: 4/6; median age: 11 years) from a clinical and neurophysiological perspective. Specifically, a standardized clinical assessment of cognitive and adaptive skills, autistic symptoms, executive functions and behavioral features was performed. Moreover, event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded, referring specifically to the mismatch negativity (MMN) and P300 paradigm. Our data highlighted the presence of similarities between the intellectually gifted individuals and the ones with autism (i.e., a nonhomogeneous intellective profile, an adaptive skills impairment, subthreshold autistic symptoms and increased perfectionism). Interestingly, a distinct neurophysiological characterization between groups came out, with evidence of a reduced MMN amplitude only in the HFA group. Furthermore, no differences within groups in the P300 component emerged. Therefore, our results start to provide a more informative characterization of the HIP phenotype in comparison to those of HFA and NTD, highlighting the potential role of the MMN amplitude index in helping clinicians and researchers to distinguish between HIP and HFA. Nevertheless, further research on the topic is strongly needed.
34942908|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and cerebral palsy (CP) are some of the most common neurodevelopmental diseases. They have multifactorial origin, which means that each case may manifest differently from the others. In patients with ASD, symptoms associated with deficits in social communication and characteristic, repetitive types of behaviors or interests are predominant, while in patients with CP, motor disability is diagnosed with accompanying cognitive impairment of various degrees. In order to minimize their adverse effects, it is necessary to promptly diagnose and incorporate appropriate management, which can significantly improve patient quality of life. One of the therapeutic possibilities is stem cell therapy, already known from other branches of medicine, with high hopes for safe and effective treatment of these diseases. Undoubtedly, in the future we will have to face the challenges that will arise due to the still existing gaps in knowledge and the heterogeneity of this group of patients. The purpose of this systematic review is to summarize briefly the latest achievements and advances in stem cell therapy for ASD and CP.
34942856|a|The high level of heterogeneity in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and the lack of systematic measurements complicate predicting outcomes of early intervention and the identification of better-tailored treatment programs. Computational phenotyping may assist therapists in monitoring child behavior through quantitative measures and personalizing the intervention based on individual characteristics; still, real-world behavioral analysis is an ongoing challenge. For this purpose, we designed EYE-C, a system based on OpenPose and Gaze360 for fine-grained analysis of eye-contact episodes in unconstrained therapist-child interactions via a single video camera. The model was validated on video data varying in resolution and setting, achieving promising performance. We further tested EYE-C on a clinical sample of 62 preschoolers with ASD for spectrum stratification based on eye-contact features and age. By unsupervised clustering, three distinct sub-groups were identified, differentiated by eye-contact dynamics and a specific clinical phenotype. Overall, this study highlights the potential of Artificial Intelligence in categorizing atypical behavior and providing translational solutions that might assist clinical practice.
34942441|a|BACKGROUND: Social impairments characteristic of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are evident in early childhood and worsen as the child matures. Though many interventions for young children exist, few specifically target social skills and involve caregivers. AIMS: This pilot study examined PEERS  for Preschoolers, focusing on temporal change in child social skills, caregiver style, and family functioning in the context of a caregiver-assisted social skills intervention. This extension of the PEERS  program builds on the success of the intervention for older children, presenting skills in a developmentally appropriate manner to young autistic children and their caregivers. METHODS AND PROCEDURES: The present pilot study used a non-concurrent multiple baseline design to examine the above variables with 15 autistic children (Mage = 4.87, SD = 1.25; 11 boys). Children and caregivers participated in PEERS  for Preschoolers groups, with each group randomly assigned three different baseline periods (1.5, 2, or 2.5 weeks) before beginning. OUTCOMES AND RESULTS: Simulation Modeling Analysis (SMA) revealed concurrent improvements in social and caregiving skills, with subsequent changes in family functioning occurring over the course of this 16-session intervention. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Future research will need to examine mechanisms of change in PEERS  for Preschoolers for children and caregivers. WHAT THIS PAPER ADDS: There is a dearth of research that specifically examines social skills interventions for young autistic children that incorporates caregivers and examines family functioning as well. This paper is one of the first to evaluate the PEERS  for Preschoolers (P4P) intervention by: 1) exploring changes in child social skills, caregiver efficacy, and family functioning, and 2) analyzing the sequence of improvements in the aforementioned variables to measure systematic change. This pilot study presents results using appropriate methodology for a small sample size of children and caregivers. Results suggested concurrent improvements in social and caregiving skills and subsequent changes in family functioning. These can be built upon for further research on the PEERS  for Preschoolers intervention. This study supports PEERS  for Preschoolers as a feasible intervention that likely contributes to improvements for the child, caregiver in their relationship with their child and parenting styles in general, as well as functioning of the entire family. In sum, this work is essential to furthering the provision of a much needed service of social skills interventions for young autistic children.
34942343|a|Exposing the immature nervous system to specific antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) during pregnancy is linked to neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Newer AEDs like lamotrigine (LTG) are hailed as safer, but recent epidemiological data suggest that even LTG carries a risk, although much lower than that associated with valproic acid (VPA), an older AED, which is also known to cause morphological alterations in the developing brain. Increasing evidence highlights cerebellar abnormalities as important in ASD pathophysiology. Transcription factor PAX6 is a key activity-dependent mediator and regulates crucial processes during cerebellar development. The chicken cerebellum recapitulates important characteristics of human cerebellar development, and may thus be suitable for the assessment of interventions aiming to modify maturation and cerebellar development. In the present study, exposure of chicken on embryonic day 16 (E16) to LTG or VPA resulted in decreased cerebellar mass and level of proliferating nuclear cell antigen (PCNA) for clinically relevant concentrations of VPA. However, both AEDs reduced cerebellar protein levels of PAX6 and MMP-9 at E17. Furthermore, PAX6 immunohistochemical staining of coronal sections of chicken cerebellum showed a significant reduction in PAX6-positive cell density and changes in cerebellar cortex thickness, mostly caused by the change in IGL-layer thickness. In conclusion, prenatal exposure to LTG or VPA provoked differential maturational changes in the developing cerebellum that may reflect some of the underlying molecular mechanisms for the observed human ASD pathology after AEDs exposure during pregnancy.
34942119|a|Neurodevelopmental cognitive disorders provide insights into mechanisms of human brain development. Here, we report an intellectual disability syndrome caused by the loss of APC7, a core component of the E3 ubiquitin ligase anaphase promoting complex (APC). In mechanistic studies, we uncover a critical role for APC7 during the recruitment and ubiquitination of APC substrates. In proteomics analyses of the brain from mice harboring the patient-specific APC7 mutation, we identify the chromatin-associated protein Ki-67 as an APC7-dependent substrate of the APC in neurons. Conditional knockout of the APC coactivator protein Cdh1, but not Cdc20, leads to the accumulation of Ki-67 protein in neurons in vivo, suggesting that APC7 is required for the function of Cdh1-APC in the brain. Deregulated neuronal Ki-67 upon APC7 loss localizes predominantly to constitutive heterochromatin. Our findings define an essential function for APC7 and Cdh1-APC in neuronal heterochromatin regulation, with implications for understanding human brain development and disease.
34941429|a|Objective: To assess the efficacy and safety of transcranial photobiomodulation (tPBM) in adults with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Methods: Adults with high-functioning-ASD, between 18 and 59 years of age, were enrolled to receive twice a week tPBM for 8 weeks in an open-label single group design. ASD symptom severity was assessed at baseline, midpoint, and end-point, by clinician-, self-, and informant-rated measures. Treatment response was defined as a >=30% reduction in Social Responsiveness Scale-2nd Edition (SRS-2) total score and ASD Clinical Global Impression-Improvement score <=2. Any possible adverse events were recorded at each visit. Paired-samples t-test analyses were performed. Results: Eleven participants were enrolled, and 10 participants (9 males; 30.0 +- 11.9 years) completed the study. One participant withdrew consent before baseline. All 10 completers were included in efficacy and safety analyses. Five participants (50%) met responder criteria at end-point. Overall, 8-week tPBM was associated with significant reduction in SRS-2 total scores at end-point (SRS-2: -30.6 +- 23, p < 0.001) particularly in Social Awareness (-3.0 +- 1.9, p < 0.001), Social Communication (-10.3 +- 6, p < 0.001), Social Motivation (-5.0 +- 2.4, p < 0.001), and Restricted/Repetitive Behaviors (-7.4 +- 4.1, p < 0.001). There were statistically significant improvements at end-point in Global Assessment of Functioning scores (+12.8 +- 4.2, p < 0.001) and Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire scores (+6.0 +- 7.9, p = 0.02). Three participants experienced transient, mild side effects (insomnia, headache, and warmth at treatment application site). No adverse events required changes in tPBM protocol. Adherence rate was 98%. Conclusions: tPBM is a safe and feasible treatment approach that has the potential to treat core features of ASD. Further research is necessary and warranted. ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03724552.
34940990|a|
34940389|a|The university provides academic support to disabled students, however, few institutions provide academic, extra-academic or preventive support to students with Autism Spectrum Disorders High-Functioning (ASD-HF). Among the most commonly requested needs is support for coping with anxiety arising from academic and social activity itself. When planning an intervention program, it is necessary to screen those who have problems and are likely to benefit from such a program. In this article we propose a systematic search for measures of anxiety for young people and adults with ASD-HF. Of a total of 683 documents, only 7 met the selection criteria. Of these, a total of 35 tools were detected, of which only 11 mediated anxiety. Screening should be carried out for all students, so that we can detect the "risk" of anxiety disturbance in all cases and, in particular, in students with ASD-HF. However, the instruments eligible for assessing intervention outcomes should be agreed upon in order to be able to compare results from different trials.
34940387|a|Social media platforms have become accessible resources for health data analysis. However, the advanced computational techniques involved in big data text mining and analysis are challenging for public health data analysts to apply. This study proposes and explores the feasibility of a novel yet straightforward method by regressing the outcome of interest on the aggregated influence scores for association and/or classification analyses based on generalized linear models. The method reduces the document term matrix by transforming text data into a continuous summary score, thereby reducing the data dimension substantially and easing the data sparsity issue of the term matrix. To illustrate the proposed method in detailed steps, we used three Twitter datasets on various topics: autism spectrum disorder, influenza, and violence against women. We found that our results were generally consistent with the critical factors associated with the specific public health topic in the existing literature. The proposed method could also classify tweets into different topic groups appropriately with consistent performance compared with existing text mining methods for automatic classification based on tweet contents.
34940131|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurological disorder triggered by various factors through complex mechanisms. Research has been done to elucidate the potential etiologic mechanisms in ASD, but no single cause has been confirmed. The involvement of oxidative stress is correlated with ASD and possibly affects mitochondrial function. This study aimed to elucidate the link between mitochondrial dysregulation and idiopathic ASD by focusing on mitochondrial respiratory capacity and membrane potential. Our findings showed that mitochondrial function in the energy metabolism pathway was significantly dysregulated in a lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL) derived from an autistic child (ALCL). Respiratory capacities of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), electron transfer of the Complex I and Complex II linked pathways, membrane potential, and Complex IV activity of the ALCL were analyzed and compared with control cell lines derived from a developmentally normal non-autistic sibling (NALCL). All experiments were performed using high-resolution respirometry. Respiratory capacities of OXPHOS, electron transfer of the Complex I- and Complex II-linked pathways, and Complex IV activity of the ALCL were significantly higher compared to healthy controls. Mitochondrial membrane potential was also significantly higher, measured in the Complex II-linked pathway during LEAK respiration and OXPHOS. These results indicate the abnormalities in mitochondrial respiratory control linking mitochondrial function with autism. Correlating mitochondrial dysfunction and autism is important for a better understanding of ASD pathogenesis in order to produce effective interventions.
34940100|a|Autism spectrum disorders represent a challenge for professionals, who must include in their individualized educational interventions goals for core symptoms (social-communication and stereotypies/restricted interests) and comorbidities. The narrowness of interests and the high frequency of repetitive behaviors in children with autism often constitute an obstacle for learning and the quality of life, and for their caregivers as well. In the scientific literature, behavioral interventions based on both aversive and, less commonly, positive procedures have been implemented to reduce the frequency of stereotypies. The following study was carried out with the intention of replicating a Stimulus-Stimulus Pairing procedure applied by Nuzzolo-Gomez, Leonard, Ortiz, Rivera and Greer (2002) in order to reduce stereotypies in children. This procedure was applied to three children diagnosed with autism aged five, almost six and seven years, in order to reduce stereotypies when children watched movies. An A-B-A experimental design with three subjects was used for this research. The results showed a decrease in stereotypies in favor of appropriate behaviors.
34939924|a|Neurons rely on translation of synaptic mRNAs in order to generate activity-dependent changes in plasticity. Here we develop a strategy combining compartment-specific CLIP and TRAP in conditionally tagged mice to precisely define the ribosome-bound dendritic transcriptome of CA1 pyramidal neurons. We identify CA1 dendritic transcripts with differentially localized mRNA isoforms generated by alternative polyadenylation and alternative splicing, including many which have altered protein-coding capacity. Among dendritic mRNAs, FMRP targets were found to be overrepresented. Cell-type specific FMRP-CLIP and TRAP in microdissected CA1 neuropil revealed 383 dendritic FMRP targets and suggests that FMRP differentially regulates functionally distinct modules in CA1 dendrites and cell bodies. FMRP regulates ~15-20% of mRNAs encoding synaptic functions and 10% of chromatin modulators, in the dendrite and cell body, respectively. In the absence of FMRP, dendritic FMRP targets had increased ribosome association, consistent with a function for FMRP in synaptic translational repression. Conversely, downregulation of FMRP targets involved in chromatin regulation in cell bodies and suggest a role for FMRP in stabilizing mRNAs containing stalled ribosomes in this compartment. Together, the data support a model in which FMRP regulates the translation and expression of synaptic and nuclear proteins within different compartments of a single neuronal cell type.
34939886|a|OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the effect of balance rehabilitation on postural control in both low and increased cognitive load conditions in two children with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD). METHODS: Two children diagnosed with ASD participated in a 4-week personalized balance rehabilitation program with two sessions per week. We assessed postural control in two single task (ST) conditions with low cognitive load: Eyes Closed (EC), Eyes Open (EO); and in five increased cognitive load conditions. Those dual task (DT) conditions consisted of presenting images representing a neutral condition, sadness, anger, happiness, and fear. Postural control parameters (surface, velocity, medio-lateral and antero-posterior sway amplitudes of the center of pressure (CoP)) were collected by a posturographic platform before and after the balance rehabilitation. RESULTS: The rehabilitation program resulted in a 30-96% improvement of postural control parameters in the ST condition for both participants. In DT, participant 1 progressed on all conditions while participant 2 progressed on 3 of the 5 conditions (sadness, anger and fear). CONCLUSION: This suggests that these two children with ASD improved their balance control in both low and increased cognitive load conditions. These encouraging results need to be replicated before recommending balance rehabilitation as standard health rehabilitation in children with ASD.
34939747|a|Circumstances surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic have resulted in significant personal and professional adjustments. Students and trainees, including those in autism research, face unique challenges to accomplishing their training and career goals during this unprecedented time. In this commentary, we, as members of the International Society for Autism Research Student and Trainee Committee, describe our personal experiences, which may or may not align with those of other students and trainees. Our experiences have varied both in terms of the ease (or lack thereof) with which we adapted and the degree to which we were supported in the transition to online research and clinical practice. We faced and continue to adjust to uncertainties about future training and academic positions, for which opportunities have been in decline and have subsequently negatively impacted our mental health. Students and trainees' prospects have been particularly impacted compared to more established researchers and faculty. In addition to the challenges we have faced, however, there have also been unexpected benefits in our training during the pandemic, which we describe here. We have learned new coping strategies which, we believe, have served us well. The overarching goal of this commentary is to describe these experiences and strategies in the hope that they will benefit the autism research community moving forward. Here, we provide a set of recommendations for faculty, especially mentors, to support students and trainees as well as strategies for students and trainees to bolster their self-advocacy, both of which we see as crucial for our future careers. LAY SUMMARY: The COVID-19 pandemic has affected students and trainees, including those in autism research, in different ways. Here, we describe our personal experiences. These experiences include challenges. For example, it has been difficult to move from in-person to online work. It has also been difficult to keep up with work and training goals. Moreover, working from home has made it hard to connect with our supervisors and mentors. As a result, many of us have felt unsure about how to make the best career choices. Working in clinical services and getting to know and support our patients online has also been challenging. Overall, the pandemic has made us feel more isolated and some of us have struggled to cope with that. On the other hand, our experiences have also included benefits. For example, by working online, we have been able to join meetings all over the world. Also, the pandemic has pushed us to learn new skills. Those include technical skills but also skills for well-being. Next, we describe our experiences of returning to work. Finally, we give recommendations for trainees and supervisors on how to support each other and to build a strong community.
34939671|a|BACKGROUND: Measures based on pupillometry, such as the pupillary light reflex (PLR) and baseline pupil size, reflect physiological responses linked to specific neural circuits that have been implicated as atypical in some psychiatric and neurodevelopmental conditions. METHODS: We investigated the contribution of genetic and environmental factors to the baseline pupil size and the PLR in 510 infant twins assessed at 5 months of age (281 monozygotic and 229 dizygotic pairs), and its associations with common genetic variants associated with neurodevelopmental (autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder) and mental health (bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder and schizophrenia) conditions using genome-wide polygenic scores (GPSs). RESULTS: Univariate twin modelling showed high heritability at 5 months for both pupil size (h2  = .64) and constriction in response to light (h2  = .62), and bivariate twin modeling indicated substantial independence between the genetic factors influencing each (rG  = .38). A statistically significant positive association between infant tonic pupil size and the GPS for schizophrenia was found (beta = .15, p = .024), while there was no significant association with the GPS for autism or any other GPSs. CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that some pupil measures are highly heritable in early infancy, although substantially independent in their genetic etiologies, and associated with common genetic variants linked to schizophrenia. It illustrates how genetically informed studies of infants may help us understand early physiological responses associated with psychiatric disorders which emerge much later in life.
34939668|a|BACKGROUND: The transition between child and adult services should aim to support young people into the next stage of their life in a way that optimises their function. Yet financial, organisational and procedural barriers to continuity of care often hamper smooth transition between child and adult services. AIM AND METHOD: We reviewed studies of transition from child to adult mental health services, focusing on: (a) rates of referrals and referral acceptance; (b) barriers and facilitators of successful transition; (c) continuity of care during and post-transition and (d) service users' experience of transition. Studies were identified through systematic searches of electronic databases: PsycINFO, Medline, Embase and Child Development and Adolescent Studies. FINDINGS: Forty-seven papers describing 43 unique studies met inclusion criteria. Service provision is influenced by previous history and funding processes, and the presence or absence of strong primary care, specialist centres of excellence and coordination between specialist and primary care. Provision varies between and within countries, particularly whether services are restricted to 'core' mental health or broader needs. Unsupportive organisational culture, fragmentation of resources, skills and knowledge base undermine the collaborative working essential to optimise transition. Stigma and young people's concerns about peers' evaluation often prompt disengagement and discontinuation of care during transition, leading to worsening of symptoms and later, to service re-entry. Qualitative studies reveal that young people and families find the transition process frustrating and difficult, mainly because of lack of advanced planning and inadequate preparation. CONCLUSIONS: Despite increasing research interest over the last decade, transition remains 'poorly planned, executed and experienced'. Closer collaboration between child and adult services is needed to improve the quality of provision for this vulnerable group at this sensitive period of development.
34939353|a|Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are frequently diagnosed with co-occurring medical conditions including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). To investigate the association, we conducted a systematic review registered in PROSPERO (ID:CRD42021236263) with a random-effects meta-analysis. We searched PubMed, Embase, and PsycInfo (last search on January 25, 2021), and manually searched relevant publications. We included observational studies measuring the association between ASD and IBD. The primary outcome was the association (odds ratio, OR) between ASD and later development of IBD. Sensitivity analyses were conducted by quality, confounding adjustment, and study design. We performed meta-regression analyses and assessed heterogeneity, publication bias, and quality of studies with the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. Overall, we included six studies consisting of eight datasets, including over 11 million participants. We found that ASD was significantly associated with subsequent incident IBD (any IBD, OR = 1.66, 95% confidence interval[CI] = 1.25-2.21, p < 0.001; ulcerative colitis, OR = 1.91, 95%CI = 1.41-2.6, p < 0.001; Crohn's disease, OR = 1.47, 95%CI = 1.15-1.88, p = 0.002). ASD and IBD were also associated regardless of temporal sequence of diagnosis (any IBD, OR = 1.57, 95%CI = 1.28-1.93, p < 0.001; ulcerative colitis, OR = 1.7, 95%CI = 1.36-2.12, p < 0.001; Crohn's disease, OR = 1.37, 95%CI = 1.12-1.69, p = 0.003). Sensitivity analyses confirmed the findings of the main analysis. Meta-regression did not identify any significant moderators. Publication bias was not detected. Quality was high in four datasets and medium in four. In conclusion, our findings highlight the need to screen for IBD in individuals with ASD, and future research should identify who, among those with ASD, has the highest risk of IBD, and elucidate the shared biological mechanisms between ASD and IBD.
34938619|a|The gut microbiota is a quickly developing bacterial ecosystem with biodiversity. It is an adaptive immunity that varies with food intake, environmental conditions, and human habits, among other factors. Various external stimuli, such as drugs, can influence the gut microbial environment and lead to gut dysbiosis. Recently, gut dysbiosis has been identified as an important factor that leads to several diseases either by the released metabolites or by the gut neuronal connection. In brain disorders, gut dysbiosis is involved in neuropsychiatric manifestations, including autism spectrum disorder, anxiety, and depression by interfering with neurotransmitter homeostasis, and neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease by releasing abnormal metabolites from the gut. Gut dysbiosis has been documented in gut disorders, including inflammatory bowel disease or irritable bowel syndrome. Immune cells in the gut are modulated by external factors such as stress, diet, and drugs to produce inflammatory cytokines, including interleukins (IL-4, IL-6, IL-17, IL-23, etc.). Inflammatory cytokines lead to a cascade of events, which lead to various ailments in the bowel. Beneficial bacteria in the form of probiotics ameliorate the condition and have healthful effects in disease conditions. This warrants further research to identify newer therapeutic strategies for diseases that cannot be cured or are difficult to treat.
34936828|a|Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) often have deficits in motor skills, especially balance. This article presents a meta-analytic review of 15 intervention studies that aimed to improve balance in children and adolescents with ASD. Across these studies, there were 195 participants with ASD for whom pre-intervention and post-intervention balance scores were available. We measured the standardized mean difference (Hedges' g) between their pre-intervention and post-intervention balance scores and found a large, positive effect from these balance interventions (standardized mean difference-1.82 (95% CI [1.34, 2.29])). Various balance intervention procedures were shown to be very efficacious for children and adolescents with ASD. Clearly, balance is a motor skill that is very susceptible to intervention efforts. We also provided recommendations to researchers regarding what information to include when conducting intervention studies.
34936279|a|YUAN Qing's clinical experience in treating autism spectrum disorder using Tiaoshen (regulating the spirit) acupuncture is summarized. YUAN Qing believes that the basic pathogenesis of children with autism spectrum disorder is due to the impairment of brain essence and heart mind. Thus regulating the spirit, especially adjusting brain essence and heart mind is essential during clinical treatment. The main acupoints on the head (brain tri-points, four-spirit points, spirit setting points, mental tri-points, spirit waking-up points and foot mental points) are used to adjust brain essence, and hand mental tri-points (Shenmen[HT 7], Neiguan[PC 6] and Laogong[PC 8]) are used for adjusting heart mind, and emphasizing the importance of the spirit of the doctor and the children's parents.
34936220|a|Social communication and interaction deficits are a diagnostic criteria of autism and integral to practitioner and researcher conceptualization. Culture is an influential factor in expectations for, and demonstration of, social communication and interaction skills, but there is limited research published in autism journals on this topic. This paucity of autism research examining cultural factors related to social communication and interaction may contribute to known identification disparities for racial and ethnic populations minoritized by systemic factors and research bias. We call for increased commitment from researchers to recruit racially and ethnically minoritized participants, prioritize investigating cultural expectations and perceptions of social communication and interaction, and evaluate measures related to social communication for cultural and linguistic responsivity. LAY SUMMARY: A diagnosis of autism requires the presence of deficits in social communication and interaction. Examples of these behaviors and skills include holding a back-and-forth conversation, the use of nonverbal communicative behaviors (e.g., gestures), and developing and maintaining social relationships. Culture influences the expectations for, and presentation of, these behaviors. However, research on this topic is lacking. Conducting more research related to culture and social communication could help reduce the disparities in autism identification across racially and ethnically minoritized populations.
34936034|a|Gastrointestinal (GI) problems and microbiota alterations have been frequently reported in autism spectrum disorders (ASD). In addition, abnormal perinatal trace metal levels have been found in ASD. Accordingly, mice exposed to prenatal zinc deficiency display features of ASD-like behavior. Here, we model GI development using 3D intestinal organoids grown under zinc-restricted conditions. We found significant morphological alterations. Using proteomic approaches, we identified biological processes affected by zinc deficiency that regulate barrier permeability and pro-inflammatory pathways. We confirmed our results in vivo through proteomics studies and investigating GI development in zinc-deficient mice. These show altered GI physiology and pro-inflammatory signaling, resulting in chronic systemic and neuroinflammation, and gut microbiota composition similar to that reported in human ASD cases. Thus, low zinc status during development is sufficient to compromise intestinal barrier integrity and activate pro-inflammatory signaling, resulting in changes in microbiota composition that may aggravate inflammation, altogether mimicking the co-morbidities frequently observed in ASD.
34935925|a|Importance: Recent studies have reported conflicting findings regarding a potential association between analgesia used during labor and autism spectrum disorder in the offspring. Objective: To evaluate whether neuraxial labor analgesia increases the risk of autism spectrum disorder in the offspring. Design, Setting, and Participants: This cohort study included mother-child dyads who underwent vaginal delivery and were exposed to neuraxial labor analgesia. Delivery data were collected from the Medicaid Analytic eXtract (2005-2014) for mothers with public insurance and the IBM Health MarketScan Research Database (2005-2015) for mothers with private insurance. Data analysis was conducted from January to October 2021. Exposures: Presence of a procedure code indicating neuraxial labor analgesia. Main Outcomes and Measures: Children with autism spectrum disorder, identified using a validated algorithm (positive predictive value: 94% [95% CI, 83%-99%]). Cumulative incidence curves stratified by exposure were assessed using Kaplan-Meier analyses. Hazard ratios were estimated through Cox proportional hazards regression, using propensity-score fine stratification for confounding control. Estimates from both insurance cohorts were combined through fixed-effects meta-analysis. Subsequently, results from these analyses were combined with existing published studies. Results: The cohort of mother-child dyads with public insurance consisted of 910 696 deliveries (mean [SD] maternal age, 24.3 [5.7] years; 286 025 [31.4%] Black mothers; 374 282 [41.1%] White mothers), with 484 752 (53.2%) being exposed to neuraxial labor analgesia. The cohort of mother-child dyads with private insurance included 696 883 deliveries (mean [SD] maternal age, 31.0 [4.5] years; race and ethnicity data not available), with 513 347 (73.7%) being exposed. Cumulative incidence of autism spectrum disorder by 10 years of age was 1.93% (95% CI, 1.73%-2.13%) among children in the exposed group vs 1.64% (95% CI, 1.51%-1.76%) among children in the unexposed group in the publicly insured cohort. Respective numbers were 1.33% (95% CI, 1.19%-1.46%) and 1.19% (95% CI, 0.99%-1.38%) in the privately insured cohort. Adjusting for potential confounders and pooling across both cohorts resulted in a hazard ratio of 1.08 (95% CI, 1.02-1.15). Results were consistent when additionally adjusting for empirically identified variables through high-dimensional propensity score analyses (pooled hazard ratio, 1.07; 95% CI, 1.00-1.14) or expanding the cohorts to include cesarean deliveries and assisted vaginal deliveries (pooled hazard ratio, 1.07; 95% CI, 1.03-1.12). Meta-analysis of this study and recently published observational studies yielded similar findings with a pooled hazard ratio of 1.10 (95% CI, 1.06-1.13). Conclusions and Relevance: Although a small increase in risk cannot be ruled out, the combined evidence from observational studies does not support the notion that neuraxial labor analgesia is associated with an increased risk of autism spectrum disorder.
34935590|a|Introduction: Alteration of human gut microbiota is described in a number of neuro-developmental and cognitive disorders including autistic spectrum disorder (ASD). Along with the changes in the gut microbiota, children with ASD are also reported to have changes in urinary organic acid spectra implying these metabolites as potential biomarkers for gastrointestinal dysbiosis.Aim: Identify urinary metabolites that would indicate specific changes in the gut microbiota and could be useful as biomarkers.Methods: The study group consisted of 44 children with ASD. Urinary organic acids spectra and composition of gut microbiota were analysed.Results: Any significant deviation in quantified metabolites compared to the reference values were not confirmed. The main variations were detected in concentration of p-cresol and 3-(3-hydroxyphenyl)-3-hydroxypropionic acid (HPHPA), but we cannot confirm the presence of HPHPA in urine as a biomarker for Clostridium sp. overgrowth in the gut. The acquired results indicate higher relative abundance of Firmicutes phylum alone may be attributed to increased concentration of p-cresol in urine. Decreased Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes ratio was found in the group with the presence of HPHPA in urine.Conclusions: Metabolites of human urine can be used as biomarkers for alterations of gut microbiota with caution, guided treatment should be administrated only based on gut microbiota analysis results or in combination with urinary organic acid results, but not solely based on organic acid biomarkers.
34934690|a|Background: Autism is reportedly the most severe neuropsychiatric disorder affecting children. Autistic subjects can be characterized by impairments in social interactive behavior along with restricted interests and quite frequently, are seen exhibiting repetitive behavior patterns in stereotyped manner. The inability to perform routine tasks can widely impact the oral health and also, the constant care and sense of helplessness might drastically affect quality of life. Aim: The aim of the study was to assess the oral health status and perceptions regarding an autistic child's oral health among parents. Materials and Methods: Parental perception regarding the quality of life among the afflicted autistic children was done using a self-assessment questionnaire that included eight questions which were replied to in an affirmation or negative answer. 300 parents of autism affected children formed the study participants. Recorded responses were evaluated and percentage of each response was derived. Oral health status was measured by determination of dental caries prevalence and OHI-S index using chair light illumination, mouth mirror, diagnostic probe and a standard WHO periodontal probe. For statistical analysis, the calculations were performed by using the paired t test. Statistical significance, which was fixed at P < 0.05, which is statistically significant. Results: Approximately 18.33% of parents showed were aware that oral health can influence general health; 15% did have exhibit awareness. 15% of parents did not consider that primary teeth were important; 59.1% visited any dentist only when suffering from pain; 5% went for an annual dental examination; 15% and 24.6% parents visited dental practitioners at intervals of 3 and 6 months, respectively. 30%, 25% and 51.66% parents considered obtaining consultation and getting treatment from pediatric dentist; general dentist and general physician. 41.6% parents had taken their children for restorations. 52% reported constant stress whereas 48% reported with constant distressed emotions. No significant difference was determined between the parameters. 75% of autistic children suffered from dental caries whereas oral hygiene scores demonstrated high mean value of 4. Conclusion: Autism is a severely distressing condition wherein oral health along with general physical health is affected. Since parents are directly involved in upbringing of these individuals, they also subsequently show a reduction in quality of life.
34933590|a|To investigate the maternal and neonatal risk factors related to pregnancy and birth affecting the occurrence of neurodevelopmental disorders to their children using the medical claim data for the whole population. The study was conducted on all the babies born in Korea from 2005 to 2009 based on data from the National Health Information Database. All birth records were tracked from birth to December 31, 2015. To analyze factors related to the mother, data related to the mother of the newborn were collected. Increased maternal age was found to increase the risk of cerebral palsy (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] = 1.46, 95% confidence interval [CI] [1.22, 1.75]) and autism spectrum disorder (aOR = 1.48, 95% CI [1.25, 1.76]), while lowering the risk of intellectual disability (aOR = 1.83, 95% CI [1.33, 2.53]) and speech and language impairment (aOR = 1.41, 95% CI [1.08, 1.83]) compared with the reference group aged 25 to 29 years old. The incidence affected by socioeconomic factors varied according to the types of disorders. Among various risk factors, prematurity or low birth weight, problems associated with amniotic fluid or amniotic membrane, preeclampsia or eclampsia, and cesarean section affect the incidence of neurodevelopmental disorders. To reduce the incidence or severity of neurodevelopmental disorders, a better understanding of the risk factors of neurodevelopmental disorders is important. The results of this study can be used as basic data to help such understanding.
34932941|a|The neural basis of abnormal social behavior in autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) remains incompletely understood. Here we used two complementary but independent brain-wide mapping approaches, mouse resting-state fMRI and c-Fos-iDISCO+ imaging, to construct brain-wide activity and connectivity maps of the Cntnap2 knockout (KO) mouse model of ASD. At the macroscale level, we detected reduced functional coupling across social brain regions despite general patterns of hyperconnectivity across major brain structures. Oxytocin administration, which rescues social deficits in KO mice, strongly stimulated many brain areas and normalized connectivity patterns. Notably, chemogenetically triggered release of endogenous oxytocin strongly stimulated the nucleus accumbens (NAc), a forebrain nucleus implicated in social reward. Furthermore, NAc-targeted approaches to activate local oxytocin receptors sufficiently rescued their social deficits. Our findings establish circuit- and systems-level mechanisms of social deficits in Cntnap2 KO mice and reveal the NAc as a region that can be modulated by oxytocin to promote social interactions.
34932641|a|PURPOSE: to assess the pragmatic and social communicative abilities of children with Typical Language Development (TLD), Autism Spectrum disorder (ASD) and Developmental Language Disorder (DLD). METHODS: Participants were 40 parents and 29 teachers of 40 children ages between 3 and 6 years. Ten children had DLD, ten had ASD and 20 had typical development. All participants answered to the questionnaire of the "Assessment of Pragmatic Language and Social Communication - APLSC - parent and professional reports - beta research version. Data were submitted to statistical analysis. RESULTS: The assessment tool was useful in identifying the difference in performance of children with different social communicative profiles. CONCLUSION: Children with ASD presented social and pragmatic impairments that were more significant than those presented by children with DLD. However, both children with ASD and with DLD presented more social pragmatic difficulties than children with TLD.
34932295|a|The function of the formation of speech skills is decisive in the development of a child in communication and assimilation of information. Early pediatric diagnosis should become a routine practice of monitoring children from infancy to school age for the timely correction of speech disorders and associated dysgraphia and dyslexia. According to the ICD-10 classification, speech developmental disorders are divided into the following options: articulation impairment, delay in expressive and impressive speech. Articulation disorders, stuttering, impaired expressive speech are the most common and most favorable prognosis for speech therapy interventions. The data on the effectiveness of disorders of the receptive (impressive) language are ambiguous, since there is a high likelihood of a combination with neurogenetic diseases and autism. The development of speech therapy programs will make it possible to broader coverage of those in need of treatment, including complex course therapy with neuropeptides (cortexin).
34932181|a|
34932014|a|BACKGROUND: In the absence of official clinical trial information, data from social networks can be used by public health and medical researchers to assess public claims about loosely regulated substances such as cannabidiol (CBD). For example, this can be achieved by comparing the medical conditions targeted by those selling CBD against the medical conditions patients commonly treat with CBD. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to provide a framework for public health and medical researchers to use for identifying and analyzing the consumption and marketing of unregulated substances. Specifically, we examined CBD, which is a substance that is often presented to the public as medication despite complete evidence of efficacy and safety. METHODS: We collected 567,850 tweets by searching Twitter with the Tweepy Python package using the terms "CBD" and "cannabidiol." We trained two binary text classifiers to create two corpora of 167,755 personal use and 143,322 commercial/sales tweets. Using medical, standard, and slang dictionaries, we identified and compared the most frequently occurring medical conditions, symptoms, side effects, body parts, and other substances referenced in both corpora. In addition, to assess popular claims about the efficacy of CBD as a medical treatment circulating on Twitter, we performed sentiment analysis via the VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary for Sentiment Reasoning) model on the personal CBD tweets. RESULTS: We found references to medically relevant terms that were unique to either personal or commercial CBD tweet classes, as well as medically relevant terms that were common to both classes. When we calculated the average sentiment scores for both personal and commercial CBD tweets referencing at least one of 17 medical conditions/symptoms terms, an overall positive sentiment was observed in both personal and commercial CBD tweets. We observed instances of negative sentiment conveyed in personal CBD tweets referencing autism, whereas CBD was also marketed multiple times as a treatment for autism within commercial tweets. CONCLUSIONS: Our proposed framework provides a tool for public health and medical researchers to analyze the consumption and marketing of unregulated substances on social networks. Our analysis showed that most users of CBD are satisfied with it in regard to the condition that it is being advertised for, with the exception of autism.
34931990|a|BACKGROUND: Smoking tobacco, poor nutrition, risky alcohol use, and physical inactivity (SNAP) behaviors tend to cluster together. Health benefits may be maximized if interventions targeted multiple health risk behaviors together rather than addressing single behaviors. The internet has wide reach and is a sustainable mode for delivery of interventions for multiple health behaviors. However, no systematic reviews have examined the long-term effectiveness of internet-based interventions on any combination of or all SNAP behaviors in adults aged 18 years or older. OBJECTIVE: This systematic review examined, among adults (aged >=18 years), the effectiveness of internet-based interventions on SNAP behaviors collectively in the long term compared with a control condition. METHODS: The electronic databases Medline, PsycINFO, Embase, CINAHL, and Scopus were searched to retrieve studies describing the effectiveness of internet-based interventions on >=2 SNAP behaviors published by November 18, 2019. The reference lists of retrieved articles were also checked to identify eligible publications. The inclusion criteria were randomized controlled trials or cluster randomized controlled trials with adults examining an internet-based intervention measuring the effect on >=2 SNAP behaviors at least 6 months postrecruitment and published in English in a peer-reviewed journal. Two reviewers independently extracted data from included studies and assessed methodological quality using the Quality Assessment Tool for Quantitative Studies. A robust variance estimation meta-analysis was performed to examine the long-term effectiveness of internet-based interventions on all 4 SNAP risk behavior outcomes. All SNAP outcomes were coded so they were in the same direction, with higher scores equating to worse health risk behaviors. RESULTS: The inclusion criteria were met by 11 studies: 7 studies measured the effect of an internet-based intervention on nutrition and physical activity; 1 study measured the effect on smoking, nutrition, and physical activity; and 3 studies measured the effect on all SNAP behaviors. Compared with the control group, internet-based interventions achieved an overall significant improvement across all SNAP behaviors in the long term (standardized mean difference -0.12 [improvement as higher scores = worse health risk outcomes], 95% CI -0.19 to -0.05; I2=1.5%, P=.01). The global methodological quality rating was "moderate" for 1 study, while the remaining 10 studies were rated as "weak." CONCLUSIONS: Internet-based interventions were found to produce an overall significant improvement across all SNAP behaviors collectively in the long term. Internet-based interventions targeting multiple SNAP behaviors have the potential to maximize long-term improvements to preventive health outcomes.
34931405|a|BACKGROUND: In the United Kingdom, policy change has led to specialist intellectual disability inpatient bed reduction. Little evidence exists assessing the results for patients admitted to such units. This study evaluates the outcomes of a specialist intellectual disability inpatient unit. METHOD: Gender/age/ethnicity/intellectual disability severity/co-morbid psychiatric/developmental disorders, treatment length and stay data were collected. The health of the nation outcome scales for people with learning disabilities (HoNOS-LD) scores at admission, treatment completion and discharge were recorded. Analysis of these multiple variables and correlations within different patient groups was investigated using various statistical tests. RESULTS: Of 169/176 patients (2010-2018), admission to discharge, HoNOS-LD global and all individual items score decreased significantly, for all patient categories. Treatment completion to discharge duration was significant for the whole cohort. CONCLUSIONS: This is the largest study of intellectual disability inpatient outcomes. Discharge from the hospital appears not associated with duration of treatment. Using HoNOS-LD to demonstrate treatment effectiveness is recommended.
34931277|a|The causes of aggressive behavior in children with autism are poorly understood, which limits treatment options. Therefore, this study used behavioral testing and parent reports of 60 children with autism to investigate the interplay of emotion misinterpretation and hostile attribution bias in the prediction of different aggressive behaviors. Further, the additional impact of dysfunctional emotion regulation was examined. Path analyses indicated that hostile attribution bias increased verbal and covert aggression but not physical aggression and bullying. Dysfunctional emotion regulation had an additional impact on bullying, verbal aggression, and covert aggression. Emotion recognition was positively associated with hostile attribution bias. These findings provide a first insight into a complex interplay of socio-emotional variables; longitudinal studies are needed to examine causal relationships.
34931007|a|The early-life modifications of intestinal microbiota may impact children's subsequent emotional and cognitive development. Studies show that some bacteria species in gut microbiota, and the lack of others, may play a key role in autism spectrum disorders (ASD) development. Fecal samples were obtained from three groups of children: 16 healthy, 24 with allergies (ALG), and 33 with ASD (probiotics and non-probiotics users). The analysis was carried out according to the KyberKompakt Pro protocol. We observed a significantly higher level of Klebsiella spp. in the healthy children from the non-probiotics group, considering three groups. In the same group, Bifidobacterium spp. the level was lower in ASD compared to neurotypical individuals. In healthy children who did not use probiotics, strong positive correlations were observed in E. coli and Enterococcus spp. and Bacteroides and Klebsiella spp., and a negative correlation for Akkermansia muciniphila with both Klebsiella spp. and Bacteroides spp. In the ASD group who take probiotics, a strongly negative correlation was observed in Lactobacillus spp., and both Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and Akkermansia muciniphila levels. In the ALG group, the strongest, negative correlation was found between Enterococcus spp. and Lactobacillus spp. as in Akkermansia muciniphila and Bifidobacterium spp. The simple commercial test revealed minor differences in the composition of intestinal microorganisms between children with autism spectrum disorders and neurotypical peers.
34930816|a|BACKGROUND: High-impact pathogenic variants in more than a thousand genes are involved in Mendelian forms of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD). METHODS: This study describes the molecular and clinical characterisation of 28 probands with NDD harbouring heterozygous AGO1 coding variants, occurring de novo for all those whose transmission could have been verified (26/28). RESULTS: A total of 15 unique variants leading to amino acid changes or deletions were identified: 12 missense variants, two in-frame deletions of one codon, and one canonical splice variant leading to a deletion of two amino acid residues. Recurrently identified variants were present in several unrelated individuals: p.(Phe180del), p.(Leu190Pro), p.(Leu190Arg), p.(Gly199Ser), p.(Val254Ile) and p.(Glu376del). AGO1 encodes the Argonaute 1 protein, which functions in gene-silencing pathways mediated by small non-coding RNAs. Three-dimensional protein structure predictions suggest that these variants might alter the flexibility of the AGO1 linker domains, which likely would impair its function in mRNA processing. Affected individuals present with intellectual disability of varying severity, as well as speech and motor delay, autistic behaviour and additional behavioural manifestations. CONCLUSION: Our study establishes that de novo coding variants in AGO1 are involved in a novel monogenic form of NDD, highly similar to the recently reported AGO2-related NDD.
34930815|a|OBJECTIVE: Recent studies have provided insights into the gut microbiota in autism spectrum disorder (ASD); however, these studies were restricted owing to limited sampling at the unitary stage of childhood. Herein, we aimed to reveal developmental characteristics of gut microbiota in a large cohort of subjects with ASD combined with interindividual factors impacting gut microbiota. DESIGN: A large cohort of 773 subjects with ASD (aged 16 months to 19 years), 429 neurotypical (NT) development subjects (aged 11 months to 15 years) were emolyed to determine the dynamics change of gut microbiota across different ages using 16S rRNA sequencing. RESULT: In subjects with ASD, we observed a distinct but progressive deviation in the development of gut microbiota characterised by persistently decreased alpha diversity, early unsustainable immature microbiota, altered aboudance of 20 operational taxonomic units (OTUs), decreased taxon detection rate and 325 deregulated microbial metabolic functions with age-dependent patterns. We further revealed microbial relationships that have changed extensively in ASD before 3 years of age, which were associated with the severity of behaviour, sleep and GI symptoms in the ASD group. This analysis demonstrated that a signature of the combination of 2 OTUs, Veillonella and Enterobacteriaceae, and 17 microbial metabolic functions efficiently discriminated ASD from NT subjects in both the discovery (area under the curve (AUC)=0.86), and validation 1 (AUC=0.78), 2 (AUC=0.82) and 3 (AUC=0.67) sets. CONCLUSION: Our large cohort combined with clinical symptom analysis highlights the key regulator of gut microbiota in the pathogenesis of ASD and emphasises the importance of monitoring and targeting the gut microbiome in future clinical applications of ASD.
34930274|a|Recently, a continuous growth for both neurodevelopmental and atopic diseases' incidence was seen throughout the world. Notably, autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and atopic dermatitis (AD) attracted the attention of clinicians and scientists for their impact on the quality of life of patients, starting during childhood. Despite a number of hypotheses about common pathogenesis between the two disorders, uncertainty is still present, and data coming from various parts of the world are contradictory. Fortunately, works recently published have brought useful material for comparative analysis to the benefit of the scientific community, making large scale, country-based perspectives methodologically viable. In light of that, the present study took into account uniform data, available from country-based registries or related publications, dealing with the prevalence of the two conditions around the world, and tried to setup a simple correlation analysis between the two. According to such data, the growth of AD and ASD prevalence appear uncorrelated, leading to hypothesise that, if a common etiopathological pathway exists between the two conditions, they are likely to interact to each other due to a complex interplay of co-morbidities, genes and environmental players not enough explained by a simple correlation analysis. Such facts are worth investigation in future research.
34929647|a|BACKGROUND: Since February 2020, many governments of the world ordered strict social distancing rules to try to contain the COVID-19 pandemic, with a reported consequent increase in levels of stress, anxiety and depression in the general population. Aim of this study was to assess the prevalence of the aforementioned psychiatric symptoms across a sample of individuals with High Functioning Autism Spectrum Disorders (HF-ASDs) with respect to a group of neurotypical adults (NA), during the first two months of COVID-19 pandemic in Italy. METHOD: 45 adults with HF-ASDs and 45NA completed a structured online questionnaire, including; the Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale - 21 items (DASS-21); the Impact of Event Scale-Revised (IES-R); the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS). We also explored some specific aspects of participants' psychological well-being through an ad-hoc questionnaire. RESULTS: Subjects with HF-ASDs scored significantly higher than NA at the DASS-21, the IES-R Total Score and the PSS; NA reported a higher perceived change of their lifestyle during the lockdown than individuals with HF-ASDs, and subjects with HF-ASDs reported to feel more comfortable and less tired during the lockdown period, in relation to the social distancing measures adopted by Italian authorities. CONCLUSIONS: Adults with HF-ASDs presented higher rates of depression, anxiety, stress and PTSD-related symptoms than NA during the first two months of COVID-19 pandemic. However, they also reported to feel subjectively more comfortable and less tired during the lockdown than before, in relation to the social distancing measures.
34929469|a|Influences of pesticide exposures on the clinical expression of children with ASD not known. The aim of this study was to analyze the associations between early residential proximity to agricultural crops, proxy of exposure to pesticides, and adaptive behaviors in children with ASD. Children with ASD were recruited within the Etude Longitudinale de l'Enfant avec Autisme (ELENA) French cohort. Adaptive behaviors were assessed with the second edition of the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales (VABS-II). Baseline subscores in communication, daily living skills and socialization were considered. Residential exposure to agricultural crops was estimated by crops acreage within a 1000m radius around homes. We ran multiple linear regression models to investigate the associations between exposures to agricultural crops during the pregnancy (n = 183), the first two years of life (n = 193) and adaptive behaviors in children with ASD. The mean (SD) age of children at the inclusion in the ELENA cohort was 6.1 (3.5) years, 39% of them presented an intellectual disability (ID). The mean communication score was 73.0 (15.8). On average, the crop acreage covered 29(27)% of the acreage formed by the 1000m radius around homes. Each increase of 20% in the crop acreage was associated with a significant decrease in communication score of the VABS-II in children without ID for the pregnancy (beta = -2.21, 95%CI: 4.16 to -0.27) and the first two years of life (beta = -1.90, 95%CI: 3.68 to -0.11) periods. No association was found in children with ID. This study opens perspectives for future works to better understand ASD phenotypes.
34929467|a|Forecasting in the medical domain is critical to the quality of decisions made by physicians, patients, and health planners. Modeling is one of the most important components of decision support systems, which are frequently used to simulate and analyze under-studied systems in order to make more appropriate decisions in medical science. In the medical modeling literature, various approaches with varying structures and characteristics have been proposed to cover a wide range of application categories and domains. Regardless of the differences between modeling approaches, all of them aim to maximize the accuracy or reliability of the results in order to achieve the most generalizable model and, as a result, a higher level of profitability decisions. Despite the theoretical significance and practical impact of reliability on generalizability, particularly in high-risk decisions and applications, a significant number of models in the fields of medical forecasting, classification, and time series prediction have been developed to maximize accuracy in mind. In other words, given the volatility of medical variables, it is also necessary to have stable and reliable forecasts in order to make sound decisions. The quality of medical decisions resulting from accuracy and reliability-based intelligent and statistical modeling approaches is compared and evaluated in this paper in order to determine the relative importance of accuracy and reliability on the quality of made decisions in decision support systems. For this purpose, 33 different case studies from the UCI in three categories of supervised modeling, namely causal forecasting, time series prediction, and classification, were considered. These cases were chosen from various domains, such as disease diagnosis (obesity, Parkinson's disease, diabetes, hepatitis, stenosis of arteries, orthopedic disease, autism) and cancer (lung, breast, cervical), experiments, therapy (immunotherapy, cryotherapy), fertility prediction, and predicting the number of patients in the emergency room and ICU. According to empirical findings, the reliability-based strategy outperformed the accuracy-based strategy in causal forecasting cases by 2.26%, classification cases by 13.49%, and time series prediction cases by 3.08%. Furthermore, compared to similar accuracy-based models, the reliability-based models can generate a 6.28% improvement. As a result, they can be considered an appropriate alternative to traditional accuracy-based models for medical decision support systems modeling purposes.
34929345|a|BACKGROUND: Atypical activity in the salience network and default-mode network (DMN) has been previously reported in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, no study to date has investigated the nature and dynamics of the interaction between these two networks in ASD. METHODS: Here, we aimed to characterize the functional connectivity between the salience network and the default-mode network by utilizing resting-state fMRI data from the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE) and comparing individuals with ASD (N = 325) to a typically developing group (TD: N = 356). We examined static and dynamic levels of functional connectivity using the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) seed, as a core region of the DMN. RESULTS: We found that individuals with ASD have a higher MPFC connectivity with insula, a core region of the salience network, when compared to the TD group. Moreover, the MPFC-Insula coupling showed less variability in ASD compared to the TD group. A novel semblance-based network dynamic analysis further confirmed that the strong MPFC-Insula coupling in the ASD group reduces spontaneous attentional shift for possible external elements of the environment. Indeed, we found that excessive MPFC-Insula coupling is significantly associated with the reduced social responsiveness tendency. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the internally-oriented cognition in individuals with ASD may be due to excessive coupling between the default-mode network and the salience network.
34929279|a|Exposure to arsenic (As), an environmental toxicant, causes damages to the central nervous system (CNS) structure and function. Emerging epidemiological studies support that exposure to As, especially during the critical periods of the CNS development, may act as an environmental risk factor of autism spectrum disorders (ASD), which is characterized by behavioral changes, including abnormal social behaviors, restricted interests and repetitive behaviors. However, direct evidence supporting the cause-effect relationship between As exposure and the risk of ASD is still missing. Thus, we aimed to investigate whether As exposure during pregnancy and lactation led to autism-like behaviors in offspring mice in the present study. We established a mice model of exposure to As via drinking water during pregnancy and lactation and conducted a battery of behavioral tests to evaluate social behaviors, repetitive behaviors, anxiety behaviors and learning and memory ability in offspring mice. We found that perinatal exposure to As caused autism-like behaviors in male offspring, which demonstrated by abnormal social behaviors and repetitive behaviors. Anxiety-like behaviors, and learning and memory impairments, known as concomitant behavioral phenotypes in mice with autism-like behaviors, were also observed. Decreases of synaptic density, especially in cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum, are extensively observed in both ASD patients and animal models of ASD. Thus, immunofluorescence staining and western blotting were used to observe the expression of PSD-95 and SYP, well-known markers for presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes, to assess the synaptic density in offspring cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum. We found perinatal exposure to As decreased the expression of PSD-95 and SYP in these brain regions. This indicated that perinatal exposure to As caused decreases of synaptic density, a typical autism-like cellular alteration in brains, which may contribute to autism-like behaviors in offspring.
34929192|a|BACKGROUND: Many studies have found associations between early life air pollution exposure and subsequent onset of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, characteristics that affect susceptibility remain unclear. OBJECTIVE: This systematic review examined epidemiologic studies on the modifying roles of social, child, genetic and maternal characteristics in associations between prenatal and early postnatal air pollution exposure and ASD. METHODS: A systematic literature search in PubMed and Embase was conducted. Studies that examined modifiers of the association between air pollution and ASD were included. RESULTS: A total of 19 publications examined modifiers of the associations between early life air pollution exposures and ASD. In general, estimates of effects on risk of ASD in boys were larger than in girls (based on 11 studies). Results from studies of effects of family education (2 studies) and neighborhood deprivation (2 studies) on air pollution-ASD associations were inconsistent. Limited data (1 study) suggest pregnant women with insufficient folic acid intake might be more susceptible to ambient particulate matter less than 2.5 mum (PM2.5) and 10 mum (PM10) in aerodynamic diameter, and to nitrogen dioxide (NO2). Children of mothers with gestational diabetes had increased risk of ozone-associated ASD (1 study). Two genetic studies reported that copy number variations may amplify the effect of ozone, and MET rs1858830 CC genotype may augment effects of PM and near-roadway pollutants on ASD. CONCLUSIONS: Child's sex, maternal nutrition or diabetes, socioeconomic factors, and child risk genotypes were reported to modify the effect of early-life air pollutants on ASD risk in the epidemiologic literature. However, the sparsity of studies on comparable modifying hypotheses precludes conclusive findings. Further research is needed to identify susceptible populations and potential targets for preventive intervention.
34929003|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder associated with deficits in social interactions/communication. Despite the large number of ASD patients, there is no drug approved to treat its core symptoms. Recently, Syntocinon (oxytocin nasal spray) has been reported to have a therapeutic effect on ASD. However, the disadvantage of Syntocinon for ASD treatment is that 6 puffs/administration are required to achieve the effective pharmacological dose. Furthermore, there are no published reports evaluating the cerebral distribution profile of oxytocin after intranasal administration. TTA-121 is a newly developed intranasal oxytocin formulation with high bioavailability produced by optimizing the physicochemical properties. In this study, we prepared the same formula as Syntocinon as the control formulation (CF), and the cerebral and extracerebral distribution of oxytocin in rabbits after single intranasal administration of 3H-labeled oxytocin formulations-[3H]TTA-121 and [3H]CF were examined and compared. The area under the concentration-time curve to the time of the last quantifiable concentration (AUCt) in the whole brain was 3.6-fold higher in the [3H]TTA-121 group than in the [3H]CF group, indicating increased delivery of radioactivity to the brain by TTA-121 than by CF. Since the distribution profiles showed no notable differences in radioactivity between the olfactory bulb and trigeminal nerve, intranasally-administered oxytocin was probably transferred to the brain via both pathways. The results also showed an increase in radioactivity in the prefrontal area and the precuneus, which are probable sites of pharmacological action as shown in clinical studies using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), confirming that intranasally-administered oxytocin could reach these tissues.
34928910|a|
34928907|a|
34927158|a|We describe the case of a 37-year-old woman with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) who lived with a mother with end-stage breast cancer and a visually impaired father. She was the main caregiver for her mother, who was receiving home-based palliative care. The caregiver needed training on communication and task management so that she could manage the communication with home care staff and perform more house chores. It was also necessary to share information with home care staff about ASD and how to treat her with understanding and respect. Although most support for people with ASD focuses on schools and workplaces, to offer successful end-of-life care at home, medical and home staff need to understand and communicate well with people with ASD and provide multiple types of support. Research, guidebooks, and visuals about main caregivers who have ASD and improving the inclusivity among staff members are necessary for providing successful home care and meeting caregivers' and patients' needs and expectations.
34926684|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complex disorder with a heterogeneous etiology. Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is recognized as the most common single gene mutation associated with ASD. FXS patients show some autistic behaviors and may be difficult to distinguish at a young age from autistic children. However, there have been no published reports on the prevalence of FXS in ASD patients in Thailand. In this study, we present a pilot study to analyze the CGG repeat sizes of the FMR1 gene in Thai autistic patients. We screened 202 unrelated Thai patients (168 males and 34 females) with nonsyndromic ASD and 212 normal controls using standard FXS molecular diagnosis techniques. The distributions of FMR1 CGG repeat sizes in the ASD and normal control groups were similar, with the two most common alleles having 29 and 30 CGG repeats, followed by an allele with 36 CGG repeats. No FMR1 full mutations or premutations were found in either ASD individuals or the normal controls. Interestingly, three ASD male patients with high normal CGG and intermediate CGG repeats (44, 46, and 53 CGG repeats) were identified, indicating that the prevalence of FMR1 intermediate alleles in Thai ASD patients was approximately 1% while these alleles were absent in the normal male controls. Our study indicates that CGG repeat expansions of the FMR1 gene may not be a common genetic cause of nonsyndromic ASD in Thai patients. However, further studies for mutations other than the CGG expansion in the FMR1 gene are required to get a better information on FXS prevalence in Thai ASD patients.
34925673|a|Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an inherited, multisystemic, hamartomatous neurocutaneous disorder, with an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. It affects multiple organs, however the most susceptible ones include the brain, skin, kidneys, lungs, the retina, and the heart. TSC is characterized by considerable clinical heterogeneity. The majority of patients present with a constellation of clinical signs and symptoms, most prominently central nervous system manifestations including epilepsy, cognitive impairment and autism spectrum disorders, cutaneous, cardiac, renal and ophthalmic manifestations. Epilepsy affects 70% - 90% of patients, representing the primary neurological feature and 1 of the foremost clinical findings of the disorder. Cardiac rhabdomyomas are the most frequent cardiac manifestations, appearing as isolated or multiple lesions. Herein, we present 2 patients diagnosed with tuberous sclerosis. A 3-month-old male patient with cardiac rhabdomyomas and hypopigmented macules and a 19-month-old male patient with partial epilepsy and mild psychomotor retardation. As brain lesions represent some of the most prevalent clinical features and early onset seizures are associated with more severe cognitive, function delay, through this article we hope to emphasize the potential role MRI can play in the diagnostic workup of TSC, to ensure a more timely diagnosis, thus modifying the natural course of the disorder and its prognosis.
34925516|a|Background: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental disorder that affects behaviour and communication skills. ASD is estimated to affect approximately 1 in 66 Canadians, with symptoms typically arising within the first 3 years of life. Individuals with ASD present with an increased burden of disease and face heightened barriers to oral care. Objective: This narrative literature review aims to raise awareness of the additional needs that individuals with ASD have when seeking oral care and to identify how barriers to such care may be reduced. Methods: Twenty-one articles were included in this review, with a wide range of study designs and methodologies. Search terms in PubMed, Education Source, and CINAHL databases included autism spectrum disorder, barriers, dental, dental hygiene, developmental disability, oral health, and unmet needs. Results and discussion: Key themes that emerged as barriers to care were behavioural challenges, inhibited social and communication skills, parental dependence, clinic environment, and abilities of oral health professionals to treat clients with special care needs. Conclusion: Current literature reveals that individuals with ASD face numerous barriers when accessing oral care and attempting to achieve adequate oral health, thus contributing to an increased burden of disease. Oral health professionals should aim to improve their understanding of special care populations such as the ASD community and raise awareness among health care professionals to work towards diminishing the barriers to care these populations experience.
34925184|a|Objectives: In this study, we aim to discover whether there are valid subgroups in aging that are defined by modifiable factors and are determinant of clinically relevant outcomes regarding healthy aging. Method: Data from interviews were collected in the Longitudinal Aging Study Amsterdam at two measurement occasions with a 3-year interval. Input for the analyses were seven well-known vulnerability and protective factors of healthy aging. By means of community detection, we tested whether we could distinguish subgroups in a sample of 1478 participants (T1-sample, aged 61-101 years). We tested both the external validity (T1) and predictive validity (T2) for wellbeing and subjective cognitive decline. Moreover, replicability and long-term stability were determined in 1186 participants (T2-sample, aged 61-101 years). Results: Three similar subgroups were identified at T1 and T2. Subgroup A was characterized by high levels of education with personal vulnerabilities, subgroup B by being physically active with low support and low levels of education, and subgroup C by high levels of support with low levels of education. Subgroup C showed the lowest wellbeing and memory profile, both at T1 and T2. On most measures of wellbeing and memory, subgroups A and B did not differ from each other. At T2, the same number of subgroups was identified and subgroup profiles at T1 and T2 were practically identical. Per T1 subgroup 47-62% retained their membership at T2. Discussion: We identified valid subgroups that replicate over time and differ on external variables at current and later measurement occasions. Individual change in subgroup membership over time shows that transitions to subgroups with better outcomes are possible.
34925094|a|Video feedback (VF) is an intervention delivery technique that complements naturalistic developmental behavioral interventions (NDBI) and parent-mediated interventions (PMI) by using caregiver-child interaction videos reviewed with a clinician to facilitate behavioral change in caregivers. Although VF has been implemented in PMI with young children with ASD, examinations of feasibility and acceptability, as well as the potential effectiveness of VF in community settings, have been limited. In this pilot randomized control trial (NCT03397719; https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03397719), families were randomized into a state-funded Early Intervention (EI) NDBI program or the NDBI program augmented with VF. Results demonstrated high levels of implementation and acceptability of VF augmenting the community-based EI program in caregivers and clinicians. Both groups showed significant improvements after 6 months in social communication symptoms and some areas of developmental and adaptive skills. Clinical Trial Registration:https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03397719, identifier: NCT03397719.
34925086|a|Purpose: This study aimed to explore alterations in functional connectivity (FC) within and between default mode network (DMN), central executive network, and salience network in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) with co-occurring attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Method: A total of 135 individuals' date of the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange II was used to compare the ASD+ADHD group with the ASD group in relation to the abnormal within-network and between-network connectivity of the ASD group relative to the TD group; consequently, the correlation analysis between abnormal FC and behavior was performed. Results: The ASD+ADHD group exhibited decreased within-network connectivity in the precuneus of the ventral DMN compared with the ASD group. Among the three groups, the ASD+ADHD group showed lower connectivity, whereas the ASD group had higher connectivity than the TD group, although the effect of the separate post hoc test was not significant. Meanwhile, the ASD+ADHD group showed increased between-network connectivity between the ventral DMN and dorsal DMN and between the ventral DMN and left executive control network, compared with the ASD and TD groups. Conclusion: Dysfunction of DMN in the "triple-network model" is the core evidence for ASD with co-occurring ADHD.
34924987|a|Herein, we propose a new deep neural network model based on invariant information clustering (IIC), proposed by Ji et al., to improve the modeling performance of the leave-one-site-out cross-validation (LOSO-CV) for a multi-source dataset. Our Extended IIC (EIIC) is a type of contrastive learning; however, unlike the original IIC, it is characterized by transfer learning with labeled data pairs, but without the need for a data augmentation technique. Each site in LOSO-CV is left out in turn from the remaining sites used for training and receives a value for modeling evaluation. We applied the EIIC to the resting state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging dataset of the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange. The challenging nature of brain analysis for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) can be attributed to the variability of subjects, particularly the rapid change in the neural system of children as the target ASD age group. However, EIIC demonstrated higher LOSO-CV classification accuracy for the majority of scanning locations than previously used methods. Particularly, with the adjustment of a mini-batch size, EIIC outperformed other classifiers with an accuracy >0.8 for the sites with highest mean age of the subjects. Considering its effectiveness, our proposed method might be promising for harmonization in other domains, owing to its simplicity and intrinsic flexibility.
34924984|a|Background: Multi-site functional MRI (fMRI) databases are becoming increasingly prevalent in the study of neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders. However, multi-site databases are known to introduce site effects that may confound neurobiological and measures such as functional connectivity (FC). Although studies have been conducted to mitigate site effects, these methods often result in reduced effect size in FC comparisons between controls and patients. Methods: We present a site-wise de-meaning (SWD) strategy in multi-site FC analysis and compare its performance with two common site-effect mitigation methods, i.e., generalized linear model (GLM) and Combining Batches (ComBat) Harmonization. For SWD, after FC was calculated and Fisher z-transformed, the site-wise FC mean was removed from each subject before group-level statistical analysis. The above methods were tested on two multi-site psychiatric consortiums [Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE) and Bipolar and Schizophrenia Network on Intermediate Phenotypes (B-SNIP)]. Preservation of consistent FC alterations in patients were evaluated for each method through the effect sizes (Hedge's g) of patients vs. controls. Results: For the B-SNIP dataset, SWD improved the effect size between schizophrenic and control subjects by 4.5-7.9%, while GLM and ComBat decreased the effect size by 22.5-42.6%. For the ABIDE dataset, SWD improved the effect size between autistic and control subjects by 2.9-5.3%, while GLM and ComBat decreased the effect size by up to 11.4%. Conclusion: Compared to the original data and commonly used methods, the SWD method demonstrated superior performance in preserving the effect size in FC features associated with disorders.
34924949|a|
34924788|a|Introduction: It is known that patients with anorexia nervosa (AN) display social difficulties like social responsiveness and high levels of autistic behaviors such as rigidity, narrow interests of food and weight; however it is not clear whether they have comorbid Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) or it is about acute phase of illness. In this study it is aimed to investigate autistic traits and social responsiveness in adolescents with AN. Methods: Study group was consisted of 39 female AN patients aged between 12-18 years. Control group was consisted of 34 female adolescents who did not have any psychiatric disorder. K-SADS-PL was applied to all participants in order to detect the psychiatric disorders. Autism traits and social responsiveness were evaluated using Social Responsiveness Scale. All adolescents of the study were administered The Eating Attitude Test, Beck Depression Inventory, Screen for Child Anxiety and Related Disorders, Maudsley Obsesive Compulsive Inventory. Results: Results of the study indicated that adolescents with AN had higher symptoms of depression, anxiety and autism-like symptom clusters; and lower social responsiveness. Psychiatric comorbidities were not associated with these difficulties. Conclusion: The results show that AN patients have an impairment of social responsiveness, the impairment seems to be associated with AN regardless of psychiatric comorbidities. Despite these two disorders are considered unrelated, they have several traits in common. These results suggest that there may be a common pathogenesis between ASD and AN.
34923834|a|Delivery of mental health treatment in the home can close gaps in care. Telehealth also provides access to healthcare that has been disrupted due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2016, a home direct-to-consumer telehealth program was initiated. Mental health encounters made up a significant portion of all telehealth encounters and COVID-19 had a significant impact on accelerating the utilization of telehealth. Telemental health has been more successful at meeting targeted volumes than the overall health system. Of all the mental health diagnoses before and during COVID-19, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, Autism Spectrum Disorder, and Anxiety Disorder were most common. The direct-to-consumer telehealth program saved patients a significant amount of travel miles and associated time, based on data from the period before COVID-19. Payment reimbursement for direct-to-consumer telehealth professional services was similar to reimbursement for in-person visits. This program demonstrates direct-to-consumer telehealth is a feasible and acceptable care modality for a variety of youth mental health disorders.
34923730|a|Given the significant amount of time that refugee and asylum-seeking children (RASC) spend in schools, these institutions play an important role in their lives and represent an ideal environment in which to help them to adapt to their host society. The present study aimed to draw attention to the possibility of transferring intervention methods designed for children with ASD to formal education settings welcoming newly arrived RASC to support their adaptation to their new school environment. For this purpose, a systematic review was undertaken to assess the feasibility of implementing three specific ASD intervention methods (i.e., TEACCH, PECS, and PMI) in schools welcoming RASC. While the review did not reveal previous attempts to implement and evaluate ASD intervention methods with newcomer RASC, 21 records were uncovered providing preliminary evidence in support of this idea. Hypothesized strengths and limitations, as well as considerations about implementation, are discussed.
34923624|a|BACKGROUND: Parents and family carers of children with complex needs experience a high level of pressure to meet children's needs while maintaining family functioning and, as a consequence, often experience reduced well-being and elevated psychological distress. Peer support interventions are intended to improve parent and carer well-being by enhancing the social support available to them. Support may be delivered via peer mentoring or through support groups (peer or facilitator led). Peer support interventions are widely available, but the potential benefits and risks of such interventions are not well established. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of peer support interventions (compared to usual care or alternate interventions) on psychological and psychosocial outcomes, including adverse outcomes, for parents and other family carers of children with complex needs in any setting. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the following resources.   Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL; latest issue: April 2014), in the Cochrane Library.   MEDLINE (OvidSP) (1966 to 19 March 2014).   Embase (OvidSP) (1974 to 18 March 2014).   Journals@OVID (22 April 2014).   PsycINFO (OvidSP) (1887 to 19 March 2014).   BiblioMap (EPPI-Centre, Health Promotion Research database) (22 April 2014).   ProQuest Dissertations and Theses (26 May 2014).   metaRegister of Controlled Trials (13 May 2014). We conducted a search update of the following databases.   MEDLINE (OvidSP) (2013 to 20 February 2018) (search overlapped to 2013).   PsycINFO (ProQuest) (2013 to 20 February 2018).   Embase (Elsevier) (2013 to 21 February 2018). We handsearched the reference lists of included studies and four key journals (European Child and Adolescent Psychiatry: 31 March 2015; Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders: 30 March 2015; Diabetes Educator: 7 April 2015; Journal of Intellectual Disability Research: 13 April 2015). We contacted key investigators and consulted key advocacy groups for advice on identifying unpublished data. We ran updated searches on 14 August 2019 and on 25 May 2021. Studies identified in these searches as eligible for full-text review are listed as "Studies awaiting classification" and will be assessed in a future update. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised and cluster randomised controlled trials (RCTs and cluster RCTs) and quasi-RCTs were eligible for inclusion. Controlled before-and-after and interrupted time series studies were eligible for inclusion if they met criteria set by the Cochrane Effective Practice and Organisation of Care Review Group. The comparator could be usual care or an alternative intervention. The population eligible for inclusion consisted of parents and other family carers of children with any complex needs. We applied no restriction on setting. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Inclusion decisions were made independently by two  authors, with differences resolved by a third  author. Extraction to data extraction templates was conducted independently by two authors and cross-checked. Risk of bias assessments were made independently by two authors and were reported according to Cochrane guidelines. All measures of treatment effect were continuous and were analysed in Review Manager version 5.3. GRADE assessments were undertaken independently by two review authors, with differences resolved by discussion. MAIN RESULTS: We included 22 studies (21 RCTs, 1 quasi-RCT) of 2404 participants. Sixteen studies compared peer support to usual care; three studies compared peer support to an alternative intervention and to usual care but only data from the usual care arm contributed to results; and three studies compared peer support to an alternative intervention only. We judged risk of bias as moderate to high across all studies, particularly for selection, performance, and detection bias. Included studies contributed data to seven effect estimates compared to usual care: psychological distress (standardised mean difference (SMD) -0.10, 95% confidence interval (CI) -0.32 to 0.11; 8 studies, 864 participants), confidence and self-efficacy (SMD 0.04, 95% CI -0.14 to 0.21; 8 studies, 542 participants), perception of coping (SMD -0.08, 95% CI -0.38 to 0.21; 3 studies, 293 participants), quality of life and life satisfaction (SMD 0.03, 95% CI -0.32 to 0.38; 2 studies, 143 participants), family functioning (SMD 0.15, 95% CI -0.09 to 0.38; 4 studies, 272 participants), perceived social support (SMD 0.31, 95% CI -0.15 to 0.77; 4 studies, 191 participants), and confidence and skill in navigating medical services (SMD 0.05, 95% CI -0.17 to 0.28; 4 studies, 304 participants). In comparisons to alternative interventions, one pooled effect estimate was possible: psychological distress (SMD 0.2, 95% CI -0.38 to 0.79; 2 studies, 95 participants). No studies reported on adverse outcomes. All narratively synthesised data for psychological distress (compared to usual care - 2 studies), family functioning (compared to usual care - 1 study; compared to an alternative intervention - 1 study), perceived social support (compared to usual care - 2 studies), and self-efficacy (compared to alternative interventions - 1 study) were equivocal. Comparisons with usual care showed no difference between intervention and control groups (perceived social support), some effect over time for both groups but more effect for intervention (distress), or mixed effects for intervention (family function). Comparisons with alternative interventions showed no difference between the intervention of interest and the alternative. This may indicate similar effects to the intervention of interest or lack of effect of both, and we are  uncertain which option is likely. We found no clear evidence of effects of peer support interventions on any parent outcome, for any comparator; however, the certainty of evidence for each outcome was low to very low, and true effects may differ substantially from those reported here. We found no evidence of adverse events such as mood contagion,  negative group interactions, or worsened psychological health. Qualitative data suggest that parents and carers value peer support interventions and appreciate emotional support. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Parents and carers of children with complex needs perceive peer support interventions as valuable, but this review found no evidence of either benefit or harm. Currently, there is uncertainty about the effects of peer support interventions for parents and carers of children with complex needs. However, given the overall low to very low certainty of available evidence, our estimates showing no effects of interventions may very well change with further research of higher quality.
34923498|a|INTRODUCTION: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) share overlapping symptomatology, particularly with regard to social impairments (including peer relationship difficulties), and they frequently co-occur. However, the nature of their co-occurrence remains unclear. Therefore, the current study aimed to examine the nature of the transdiagnostic link between ASD and ADHD from a symptomatological point of view measured with the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS Module 3) and the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R). METHODS: We analyzed the social and nonsocial ASD symptom domain scores from both diagnostic instruments in 4 clinically referred groups (i.e., ASD, ADHD, ASD + ADHD, and no psychiatric diagnosis) without other co-occurring mental disorders using a two-by-two full-factorial MANOVA design with the factors ASD (yes/no) and ADHD (yes/no). RESULTS: We found no ASD by ADHD interaction effects across all symptom domain scores of ADOS and ADI-R, except for ADOS imagination/creativity. There were only main effects of the factor ASD but no main effects of ADHD. Follow-up contrasts showed that exclusively, ASD had an impact on the measured symptomatology in case of co-occurring ASD + ADHD. CONCLUSION: Overall, the results support an additive model of the symptomatology across areas of communication, social interaction, and stereotyped behaviors and restricted interests in case of the co-occurrence of ASD and ADHD when assessed with ADOS/ADI-R. Thus, one can assume that the phenotypic overlap of ASD + ADHD may be less complicated than suspected - at least with regard to ASD symptomatology - and that in the presence of ADHD, ASD symptomatology is generally well measurable with best-practice diagnostic instruments.
34923358|a|INTRODUCTION: Clinical trials typically involve random assignment to treatment conditions. However, random assignment does not guarantee a lack of systematic variation in the outcomes, and application of covariation methods for multiple dependent measures requires complicated assumptions that are often not met. METHODS: This study employed matched correspondence analysis (CA) for controlling systematic variation and handling multiple outcomes. One hundred nine children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) were assessed for anxiety symptom severity across four studies, where participants were randomly assigned to either cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) or treatment as usual or waitlist (TAU/WT). Matched CA is designed to optimally scale only the differences between baseline and posttreatment, rendering the systematic baseline carryover effects irrelevant. RESULTS: Differences in treatment efficacy were observed. CBT showed treatment efficacy on anxiety severity and anxiety-related impairment relative to TAU/WT, after the control of baseline carryover effects. CONCLUSION: This study provides a way to control systematic variation between groups at the outset of treatment trials and is expected to provide a novel pathway to more proper assessment of treatment efficacy for children with ASD and anxiety.
34922566|a|Chromosome 15q24 microdeletion is a rare genetic disorder characterized by development delay, facial dysmorphism, congenital malformations, and occasional autism spectrum disorder (ASD). In this study, we identified five cases of 15q24 microdeletion using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) technology in a cohort of patients with developmental delay and/or intellectual disability. Two of these five cases had deletions that overlapped with the previously defined 1.1 Mb region observed in most reported cases. Two cases had smaller deletions (< 0.57 Mb) in the 15q24.1 low copy repeat (LCR) B-C region. They presented significant neurobehavioral features, suggesting that this smaller interval is critical for core phenotypes of 15q24 microdeletion syndrome. One case had minimal homozygous deletion of less than 0.11 Mb in the 15q24.1 LCR B-C region, which contained CYP1A1 (cytochrome P450 family 1 subfamily A member 1) and EDC3 (enhancer of mRNA decapping 3) genes, resulting in poor immunity, severe laryngeal stridor, and lower limbs swelling. This study provides additional evidence of 15q24 microdeletion syndrome with genetic and clinical findings. The results will be of significance to pediatricians in their daily practice.
34922177|a|OBJECTIVE: To combat the widespread transmission of COVID-19, many countries, including the United Kingdom, have imposed nationwide lockdowns. Little is known about how these public health safety measures affect pregnant mothers and their offspring. This study aimed to explore the impact of COVID-19 public health safety measures on births in Scotland. STUDY DESIGN: Cross-sectional study. METHODS: Using routinely collected health data on pregnancy and birth in Scotland, this study compares all births (N = 7342) between 24th March and May 2020 with births in the same period in 2018 (N = 8323) to investigate the potential negative impact of public health safety measures introduced in Scotland in spring 2020. Birth outcomes were compared using Mann-Whitney-U tests and chi-square tests. RESULTS: Mothers giving birth during the pandemic tended to combine breastfeeding and formula-feeding rather than exclusively breastfeed or exclusively formula-feed, stayed in hospital for fewer days, and more often had an epidural or a spinal anaesthetic compared to women giving birth in 2018. CONCLUSION: Overall, results suggest little impact of public health safety measures on birth outcomes. Further research is needed to explore the longer-term impacts of being born in the pandemic on both maternal mental health and child development.
34921909|a|
34921780|a|Although many neuronal membrane proteins undergo proteolytic cleavage, little is known about the biological significance of neuronal ectodomain shedding (ES). Here, we show that the neuronal sheddome is detectable in human cerebrospinal fluid (hCSF) and is enriched in neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) risk factors. Among shed synaptic proteins is the ectodomain of CNTNAP2 (CNTNAP2-ecto), a prominent NDD risk factor. CNTNAP2 undergoes activity-dependent ES via MMP9 (matrix metalloprotease 9), and CNTNAP2-ecto levels are reduced in the hCSF of individuals with autism spectrum disorder. Using mass spectrometry, we identified the plasma membrane Ca2+ ATPase (PMCA) extrusion pumps as novel CNTNAP2-ecto binding partners. CNTNAP2-ecto enhances the activity of PMCA2 and regulates neuronal network dynamics in a PMCA2-dependent manner. Our data underscore the promise of sheddome analysis in discovering neurobiological mechanisms, provide insight into the biology of ES and its relationship with the CSF, and reveal a mechanism of regulation of Ca2+ homeostasis and neuronal network synchrony by a shed ectodomain.
34921227|a|People with Phelan-McDermid Syndrome, caused by mutations in the SHANK3 gene, commonly exhibit reduced responses to sensory stimuli; yet the changes in brain-wide activity that link these symptoms to mutations in the shank3 gene remain unknown. Here we quantify movement in response to sudden darkness in larvae of two shank3 zebrafish mutant models and show that both models exhibit dampened responses to this stimulus. Using brain-wide activity mapping, we find that shank3-/- light-sensing brain regions show normal levels of activity while sensorimotor integration and motor regions are less active. Specifically restoring Shank3 function in a sensorimotor nucleus of the rostral brainstem enables the shank3-/- model to respond like wild-type. In sum, we find that reduced sensory responsiveness in shank3-/- models is associated with reduced activity in sensory processing brain regions and can be rescued by restoring Shank3 function in the rostral brainstem. These studies highlight the importance of Shank3 function in the rostral brainstem for integrating sensory inputs to generate behavioral adaptations to changing sensory stimuli.
34921204|a|Maternal distress is repeatedly reported to have negative impacts on the cognitive development in children and is linked to neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g. attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorder). However, studies examining the associations between maternal distress and the development of attention in infancy are few. This study investigated the longitudinal relationships between maternal distress (depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms, and exposure to childhood trauma) and the development of focused attention in infancy in 118 mother-infant dyads. We found that maternal exposure to non-interpersonal traumatic events in childhood was associated with the less focused attention of the infants to audio-visual stimuli at 6, 10, and 18 months. In addition, exposure to interpersonal traumatic events in childhood was identified as a moderator of the negative effect of maternal anxiety during the 2nd trimester on the development of focused attention in infants. We discuss the possible mechanisms accounting for these cross-generational effects. Our findings underscore the importance of maternal mental health to the development of focused attention in infancy and address the need for early screening of maternal mental health during pregnancy.
34920964|a|
34920755|a|Autophagy is a cell self-digestion pathway through lysosome and plays a critical role in maintaining cellular homeostasis and cytoprotection. Characterization of autophagy related genes in cell and animal models reveals diverse physiological functions of autophagy in various cell types and tissues. In central nervous system, by recycling injured organelles and misfolded protein complexes or aggregates, autophagy is integrated into synaptic functions of neurons and subjected to distinct regulation in presynaptic and postsynaptic neuronal compartments. A plethora of studies have shown the neuroprotective function of autophagy in major neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), Huntington's disease (HD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Recent human genetic and genomic evidence has demonstrated an emerging, significant role of autophagy in human brain development and prevention of spectrum of neurodevelopmental disorders. Here we will review the evidence demonstrating the causal link of autophagy deficiency to congenital brain diseases, the mechanism whereby autophagy functions in neurodevelopment, and therapeutic potential of autophagy.
34919690|a|Renal tract defects and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) deficits represent the phenotypic core of the 19q12 deletion syndrome caused by the loss of one copy of the TSHZ3 gene. While a proportion of Tshz3 heterozygous (Tshz3+/lacZ) mice display ureteral defects, no kidney defects have been reported in these mice. The purpose of this study was to characterize the expression of Tshz3 in adult kidney as well as the renal consequences of embryonic haploinsufficiency of Tshz3 by analyzing the morphology and function of Tshz3 heterozygous adult kidney. Here, we described Tshz3 expression in the smooth muscle and stromal cells lining the renal pelvis, the papilla and glomerular endothelial cells (GEnCs) of the adult kidney as well as in the proximal nephron tubules in neonatal mice. Histological analysis showed that Tshz3+/lacZ adult kidney had an average of 29% fewer glomeruli than wild type kidney. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of Tshz3+/lacZ glomeruli revealed a reduced thickness of the glomerular basement membrane and a larger foot process width. Compared to wild type, Tshz3+/lacZ mice showed lower blood urea, phosphates, magnesium and potassium at 2 months of age. At the molecular level, transcriptome analysis identified differentially expressed genes related to inflammatory processes in Tshz3+/lacZ compare to wild type (WT; control) adult kidneys. Lastly, analysis of the urinary peptidome revealed 33 peptides associated with Tshz3+/lacZ adult mice. These results provide the first evidence that in the mouse Tshz3 haploinsufficiency leads to cellular, molecular and functional abnormalities in the adult mouse kidney.
34918869|a|BACKGROUND: The inclusion of people with intellectual disabilities is limited due to a high prevalence of prejudice towards this population. We reviewed studies to identify the most effective intervention methods that focus on acceptance of people with intellectual disabilities. METHOD: A literature review was conducted using several databases-EBSCO, Web of Science, Google Scholar. The search resulted in 6728 articles, of which 26 met the inclusion criteria. RESULTS: Studies were largely consistent in reporting positive changes after interventions. Although there is no obvious pattern to determine the efficacy of an, long interventions or those involving direct contact may have the most beneficial effects on the relationships between people with and those without intellectual disabilities. CONCLUSION: The evidence suggests that several types of interventions impact the knowledge, change in the attitudes, behaviour and self-related constructs that lead to the acceptance of people with intellectual disability.
34917419|a|Objective: Parents of children with learning/attentional disabilities (LAD) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are at elevated risk for chronic stress. Types of stress and treatment needs differ between these parent groups. We adapted our evidence-based mind-body intervention (SMART-3RP) for parents of children with LAD and ASD, delivered via videoconferencing. Preliminary results from our two wait-list randomized pilot trials suggest the programs were feasible and efficacious. To gain an in-depth understanding of acceptability, the purpose of this secondary analysis from the RCTs is to (1) explore feedback regarding the virtual SMART-3RP and (2) compare feedback across LAD and ASD parents. Methods: Participants were randomized to immediate or delayed SMART-3RP (separate groups for LAD and ASD) and completed a feedback questionnaire post-intervention (N = 33 LAD, N = 37 ASD; 93% female, 93% white, Mage = 45.52, SD = 6.50). Results: Participants reported the intervention had the right number of sessions (69%), session duration (83%), and amount of structure (83%). They felt comfortable during sessions (89%) and found mind-body skills helpful (89%). There were no significant differences between parent groups other than a trend for more ASD parents reporting sessions were too long (22% ASD vs. 6% LAD, X2 = 5.67, p =0.06). Qualitative themes were similar across parents and included that video delivery had some technical challenges but enabled participation; group support and mind-body skills were helpful; and further SMART-3RP sessions or therapy is needed. Conclusion: LAD and ASD parents found a synchronous video-based mind-body resiliency program acceptable. Technology limitations notwithstanding, online delivery was very satisfactory and overcame obstacles to participation.
34917197|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a highly heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder. Over the past few decades, many studies have investigated the effects of VA supplementation in ASD patients and the relationship between vitamin A (VA) levels and ASD. VA is an essential micronutrient that plays an important role in various systems and biological processes in the form of retinoic acid (RA). Recent studies have shown that serum VA concentration is negatively correlated with the severity of ASD. The lack of VA during pregnancy or early fetal development can affect brain development and lead to long-term or even permanent impairment in the learning process, memory formation, and cognitive function. In addition, VA deficiency has been reported to have a major impact on the gastrointestinal function of children with ASD, while VA supplementation has been shown to improve the symptoms of ASD to a certain extent. This paper provides a comprehensive review of the relationship between VA and ASD.
34916976|a|Assessment of mental illness typically relies on a disorder classification system that is considered to be at odds with the vast disorder comorbidity and symptom heterogeneity that exists within and across patients. Patients with the same disorder diagnosis exhibit diverse symptom profiles and comorbidities creating numerous clinical and research challenges. Here we provide a quantitative analysis of the symptom heterogeneity and disorder comorbidity across a sample of 107,349 adult individuals (aged 18-85 years) from 8 English-speaking countries. Data were acquired using the Mental Health Quotient, an anonymous, online, self-report tool that comprehensively evaluates symptom profiles across 10 common mental health disorders. Dissimilarity of symptom profiles within and between disorders was then computed. We found a continuum of symptom prevalence rather than a clear separation of normal and disordered. While 58.7% of those with 5 or more clinically significant symptoms did not map to the diagnostic criteria of any of the 10 DSM-5 disorders studied, those with symptom profiles that mapped to at least one disorder had, on average, 20 clinically significant symptoms. Within this group, the heterogeneity of symptom profiles was almost as high within a disorder label as between 2 disorder labels and not separable from randomly selected groups of individuals with at least one of any of the 10 disorders. Overall, these results quantify the scale of misalignment between clinical symptom profiles and DSM-5 disorder labels and demonstrate that DSM-5 disorder criteria do not separate individuals from random when the complete mental health symptom profile of an individual is considered. Greater emphasis on empirical, disorder agnostic approaches to symptom profiling would help overcome existing challenges with heterogeneity and comorbidity, aiding clinical and research outcomes.
34916975|a|Although individuals with autism are at greater risk of mental health challenges than others, we know little about the relationship between the mental health of older adults (50+) and autism because they are less likely to be diagnosed. Identifying the risk and protective factors that are associated with mental health can increase educational awareness, inform clinical practice, and provide information to help diagnose and treat older adults with autism. This study used longitudinal panel data of the 2008-2016 waves of the Health and Retirement Study. It estimated individual random-effect models by interacting a genetic propensity toward autism and early life experiences to test whether the latter has a moderating effect on the relationships between genetics and the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression (CES-D) score, self-reported depression, and history of psychiatric problems. Results suggest that individuals with a higher genetic propensity for autism are less likely to develop psychiatric problems if they report a positive maternal relationship early in life. Further, a combined effect of police encounters early in life and genetic risk for autism is associated with higher CES-D scores, increased odds of self-reported depression, and a history of psychiatric problems. Clinical applications of these findings include the need to establish and support high-quality relationships by addressing both child and caregiver needs. Further, these findings support the need to design and implement proactive interventions to teach police and autistic individuals how to successfully navigate these encounters.
34916897|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by social and communication abnormalities. Heterogeneity in the expression and severity of the core and associated symptoms poses difficulties in classification and the overall clinical approach. Synaptic abnormalities have been observed in preclinical ASD models. They are thought to play a major role in clinical functional abnormalities and might be modified by targeted interventions. An imbalance in excitatory to inhibitory neurotransmission (E/I imbalance), through altered glutamatergic and GABAergic neurotransmission, respectively, is thought to be implicated in the pathogenesis of ASD. Glutamatergic and GABAergic agents have been tested in clinical trials with encouraging results as to efficacy and tolerability. Further studies are needed to confirm the role of E/I modulators in the treatment of ASD and on the safety and efficacy of the current agents.
34916323|a|OBJECTIVES: To assess whether autistic and non-autistic adults differ in their cannabis and cannabidiol (CBD) use, their perceptions of cannabinoid products and their cannabinoid-related support-seeking behaviours. DESIGN: Cross-sectional survey. PARTICIPANTS: Respondents to an online survey, who self-reported an autism-spectrum disorder diagnosis (autistic participants) or no issues relating to autism (controls). Exclusion criteria were: related/subclinical issues relating to autism, non-UK residence, under 16 years old. Propensity score matching was used to match autistic participants and controls on age, gender and ethnicity. The full-sample analysis included 269 participants and the propensity-matched sample analysis included 166 participants. Propensity-matched analysis was used for primary analysis and was considered robust if supported by triangulation with full-sample analysis. RESULTS: Autistic participants were more likely to have used CBD in the past 12 months compared with controls (OR=3.52, 95% CI 1.57 to 7.87, p=0.002). They used CBD on more days in the past 12 months (M=34, SD=93) compared with controls (M=17, SD=69, p=0.002). Autistic participants reported trusting the news and doctors less as sources of cannabinoid-related information than controls (p=0.024 and p=0.003, respectively). Autistic participants endorsed the following barriers to cannabinoid-related support seeking more than controls: 'worrying they won't understand me' (OR=3.25, 95% CI 1.67 to 6.33, p<0.001), 'going somewhere unfamiliar' (OR=5.29, 95% CI 2.62 to 10.67, p<0.001) and 'being in a crowded or chaotic place' (OR=9.79, 95% CI 4.18 to 22.89, p<0.001). CONCLUSION: Results indicate a higher prevalence and frequency of CBD use, but not cannabis use, among autistic individuals compared with controls. Findings also suggest appropriate methods to disseminate cannabinoid-related support to autistic individuals, and indicate differences in the potential barriers autistic and non-autistic individuals may face when seeking cannabinoid-related support.
34916007|a|An increasing amount of literature has indicated that chronic kidney disease (CKD) is associated with cognitive deficits that increase with worsening disease severity. Although abnormalities in brain structure have been widely documented, few studies to date have examined the functioning of brain areas associated with the specific cognitive domains affected by CKD (namely, attention and executive functions). Furthermore, few studies have examined functional connectivity among CKD youth who are relatively early in the course of the disease. The present study used functional magnetic resonance imaging to examine the resting state connectivity in 67 youth with CKD (mean age, 17 y) and 58 age-matched healthy controls. Using seed-based multiple regression, decreased connectivity was observed within the anterior cingulate portion of the default mode network. In addition, decreased connectivity within the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, paracingulate gyrus, and frontal pole were correlated significantly with disease severity. These data indicate that connectivity deficits in circuits implementing attentional processes may represent an early marker for cognitive decline in CKD.
34915925|a|BACKGROUND: There is growing concern about the psychopathological consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic. The prolonged stress due to the spreading fear of the contagion and to the enforced containment measures are deemed to trigger recurrences of preexisting mental disorders as well as the onset of new ones. From such perspective, clinical cases may be of primary ground to identify individual features and pandemic-related factors predisposing to the development of serious psychiatric symptoms. CASE PRESENTATION: Mr. R. is a 64-year-old, married, unemployed man, whose premorbid personality was characterized by relevant autistic traits. The patient developed catatonia in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. We aimed at discussing the role of both preexisting and precipitating factors. CONCLUSIONS: Autism spectrum could represent a predisposing factor for severe psychopathological outcome and catatonia. Furthermore, the present clinical case highlights the role of COVID-19 pandemic in influencing physical and mental health.
34915830|a|BACKGROUND: L-tryptophan is an essential amino acid, necessary for the human body to function. Its degradation occurs through two metabolic pathways. Approximately 95% of the L-tryptophan available in the body is converted via the kynurenine pathway, while the remainder is degraded via the serotonin pathway. Properly maintained balance between the concentrations of individual small molecular metabolites is extremely important to maintain homeostasis in the human body, and its disruption could lead to the development of numerous neurological, neurodegenerative, neoplastic, as well as cardiovascular diseases. Recent reports suggested that by controlling the levels of selected L-tryptophan metabolites (potential biomarkers), it is possible to diagnose numerous diseases, monitor their course and assess patient prognosis. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this paper is to review the currently important clinical applications of selected biomarkers from the L-tryptophan metabolism pathways that would be helpful in early diagnosis, monitoring the course and treatment of serious diseases of affluence, which ultimately could improve the patients' quality of life, as well as support targeted therapy of the aforementioned diseases. CONCLUSION: Since the biochemical biomarkers determination in body fluids presents the ideal minimally invasive tool in the patents' diagnosis and prognostication, the topic is up-to-date and, importantly, emphasized the current trends and perspectives of application of analysis of selected L-tryptophan metabolites named kynurenine and serotonin-derived small compounds in the routine medical procedures.
34915821|a|BACKGROUND: Comorbidity is the co-occurrence of two or more disorders in the same person. AIM: This study investigated the frequency of comorbid conditions, in children and adolescents, with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), cerebral palsy (CP), and a comorbid diagnosis of ASD and CP. METHOD: Ninety-six children and adolescents with ASD, CP, and both ASD and CP aged between 4 and 18 years participated in this study. Parents completed the Gastrointestinal Symptom Inventory, Children's Sleep Habits Questionnaire, Child Behavior Checklist, Social Communication Questionnaire, and the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales. RESULTS: Results of ANOVA analyses revealed significant group differences in sleep problems, social communication difficulties, and adaptive behavior. Regression analysis found that the presence of an intellectual disability significantly predicted levels of adaptive behavior. CONCLUSION: This research demonstrated the importance of studying comorbidities in children and adolescents with CP alone, ASD alone, and combined ASD and CP.
34915594|a|BACKGROUND: Adolescents and young adults with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD) have high rates of obesity and low levels of physical activity. This analysis examined changes in light, moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA) and sedentary time, and the association between changes in MVPA and weight loss in adolescents and young adults with IDD and overweight and obesity participating in a 6-month multi-component weight loss intervention. METHODS: Adolescents and young adults with IDD and overweight or obesity (body mass index >= 85 percentile, n = 110, age ~16 years, 52.7% female) and a parent were randomised to one of three intervention groups: face-to-face delivery/conventional reduced energy diet (n = 36), remote delivery (RD)/conventional reduced energy diet (n = 39), or RD/reduced energy enhanced stop light diet (eSLD) (n = 35.) Participants were asked to engage in 60 min/day of MVPA on 5 or more days/wk. Participants and a parent attended twice monthly education/behavioural counselling sessions with a health educator to assist participants in complying with dietary and MVPA recommendations. Education/counselling in the RD arms was delivered remotely using video conferencing, and self-monitoring of MVPA and daily steps was completed using a wireless activity tracker. Education/counselling in the face-to-face arm was delivered during home-visits and self-monitoring of MVPA and daily steps was completed by self-report using paper tracking forms designed for individuals with IDD. MVPA, light activity, and sedentary time were assessed over 7 days at baseline and 6 months using a portable accelerometer (ActiGraph wGT3x-BT). RESULTS: Mixed modelling analysis completed using participants with valid accelerometer data (i.e. >=4-10 h days) at baseline (n = 68) and 6 months (n = 30) revealed no significant changes in light, moderate- MVPA, or sedentary time across the 6-month intervention (all P > 0.05). Participants obtained 15.2 +- 21.5 min/day of MVPA at baseline and 19.7 +- 19.7 min/day at 6 months (P = 0.119). Mixed modelling indicated no significant effects of group (P = 0.79), time (P = 0.10), or group-by-time interaction (P = 0.21) on changes in MVPA from baseline to 6 months. Correlational analysis conducted on participants with valid accelerometer data at both baseline and 6 months (n = 24) revealed no significant associations between baseline sedentary time (r = 0.10, P = 0.40) and baseline MVPA (r = -0.22, P = 0.30) and change in MVPA across the 6-month intervention. Additionally, attendance at education/counselling sessions (r = 0.26, P = 0.22) and frequency of self-monitoring of MVPA were not significantly associated with change in MVPA from baseline to 6 months (r = 0.26, P = 0.44). Baseline MVPA (r = 0.02, P = 0.92) and change in MVPA from baseline to 6 months (r = 0.13, P = 0.30) were not associated with changes in body weight across the 6-month intervention. CONCLUSION: We observed a non-significant increase in MVPA (30%), which was not associated with the magnitude of weight loss in a sample of adolescents and young adults with IDD who participated in a 6-month multi-component weight loss intervention. Additional strategies to increase MVPA in adolescents and young adults with IDD participating in weight loss interventions need to be developed and evaluated.
34915430|a|AIM: KCNB1 encephalopathy encompasses a broad phenotypic spectrum associating intellectual disability, behavioral disturbances, and epilepsies of various severity. Using standardized parental questionnaires, we aimed to capture the heterogeneity of the adaptive and behavioral features in a series of patients with KCNB1 pathogenic variants. METHODS: We included 25 patients with a KCNB1 encephalopathy, aged from 3.2 to 34.1 years (median = 10 years). Adaptive functioning was assessed in all patients using the French version of the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales, Second Edition (VABS-II) questionnaire. We screened global behavior with the Childhood Behavioral Check-List (CBCL, Achenbach) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) with the Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ). We used a cluster analysis to identify subgroups of adaptive profiles. RESULTS: VABS-II questionnaire showed pathological adaptive behavior in all participants with a severity of adaptive deficiency ranging from mild in 8/20 to severe in 7/20. Eight out of 16 were at risk of Attention Problems at the CBCL and 13/18 were at risk of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The adaptive behavior composite score significantly decreased with age (Spearman's Rho=-0.72, p<0.001) but not the equivalent ages, suggesting stagnation and slowing but no regression over time. The clustering analysis identified two subgroups of patients, one showing more severe adaptive behavior. The severity of the epilepsy phenotype predicted the severity of the behavioral profile with a sensitivity of 70% and a specificity of 90.9%. CONCLUSION: This study confirms the deleterious consequences of early-onset epilepsy in addition to the impact of the gene dysfunction in patients with KCNB1 encephalopathy. ASD and attention disorders are frequent. Parental questionnaires should be considered as useful tools for early screening and care adaptation.
34915269|a|B cells play multiple roles in preservation of healthy immune system including management of immune responses by expression of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines. Several earlier studies have documented that B cells express both pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6, TNF-alpha as well as anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-10. However, it is yet to be examined whether these pro-/anti-inflammatory cytokines are expressed in B cells of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Pathophysiology of ASD begins in early childhood and is characterized by repetitive/restricted behavioral patterns, and dysfunction in communal/communication skills. ASD pathophysiology also has a strong component of immune dysfunction which has been highlighted in numerous earlier publications. In this study, we specifically explored pro-/anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-6, IL-17A, IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha, IL-10) in B cells of ASD subjects and compared them typically developing control (TDC) children. Present study shows that inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 and TNF-alpha are elevated in B cells of ASD subjects, while anti-inflammatory cytokine, IL-10 is decreased in ASD group when compared to TDC group. Further, TLR4 activation by its ligand, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) further upregulates inflammatory potential of B cells from ASD group by increasing IL-6 expression, whereas LPS has no significant effect on IL-10 expression in ASD group. Furthermore, LPS-induced inflammatory signaling of IL-6 in B cells of ASD subjects was partially mitigated by the pretreatment with NF-kB inhibitor. Present study propounds the idea that B cells could be crucial players in causing immune dysfunction in ASD subjects through an imbalance in expression of pro-/anti-inflammatory cytokines.
34915263|a|OBJECTIVE AND BACKGROUND: Sleep disorders (SD) are very common in childhood, especially in certain genetic syndromes. Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC) is a genetic syndromesassociated with a high rate of SD, although these are still under-recognized. The aim of this study was to assess the prevalence of SD in TSC, and to evaluate the relationship between sleep, epilepsy and TSC-associated neuropsychiatric disorders (TAND). METHODS: We administered the Sleep Disturbance Scale for Children (SDSC) and the Epworth Sleepiness Scale for Children and Adolescents (ESS-CHAD) to parents of 177 children with TSC referring to different Italian centers. We also collected information on epilepsy and TAND. RESULTS: SDSC score was positive in 59.3% of patients, being positive in 30.4% of patients without and in 63.6% of those with epilepsy (p = 0.005). However, in a multivariate logistic model considering antiseizure medications and nocturnal seizures, epilepsy ceased to be a significant risk factor for positive SDSC (OR = 2.4; p = 0.17). As for TAND, SDSC was positive in 67.9% of patients with and in 32.5% of those without TAND (p < 0.001). After adding in a multivariate logistic model active epilepsy, age, and pharmacotherapies, TAND continued to be a significant risk factor for positive SDSC (p = 0.01, OR = 1.11). CONCLUSIONS: Our results revealed a high prevalence of SD in children with TSC. Epilepsy didn't increase the risk for SD, while a very strong association was found with TAND. An early detection of SD is of utmost importance in order to plan an individualized treatment, that in some cases might also ameliorate behavior and attention.
34914994|a|BACKGROUND: Several environmental factors have been identified to be associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) over the past decades. However, evidence is limited for the effect of exposure to outdoor light at night (LAN) on ASD in China and even elsewhere in the world. METHODS: Participants in this study were from a multi-stage sampling survey on ASD conducted between June 2014 and October 2014 among children aged 3-12 years in Shanghai, China. All participants underwent a two-stage screening of ASD via questionnaire, and then, suspected cases were finally diagnosed by clinical examination. For data analyses, each ASD case was randomly matched with 10 healthy controls by age and sex. The LAN data were extracted from the stable lights product of the US Defense Meteorological Satellite Program's Operational Linescan System (DMSP-OLS) according to geolocation information of residential addresses. Mean levels of exposure to LAN during the 3 years after birth and 1 year before birth were calculated. We applied conditional logistic regression models to examine the association between LAN and ASD. RESULTS: We investigated 84,934 children from 96 kindergartens, 55 primary schools, and 28 special education schools, and 203 children were diagnosed as ASD cases. A total of 1727 children (157 ASD cases and 1570 healthy controls) were included in the final analyses. Brighter LAN exposures after and before birth were significantly associated with higher risk of ASD. After adjusting for potential covariates, adjusted odd ratios and 95% confidence intervals associated with per unit increase in LAN were 1.066 (1.027, 1.107) during the 3 years after birth and 1.046 (1.018, 1.075) during the 1 year before birth. CONCLUSIONS: Results of our study concluded brighter LAN exposure was significantly associated with higher risk of ASD among Chinese children, which suggested that outdoor LAN could be a potential risk factor of ASD.
34914919|a|Recent studies identified a circuitry within the primate amygdala that underlies both social and affective processes. Such shared functions within the same circuit, although beneficial for adaptive behavior and make sense in light of evolution, can also contribute to the growing comorbidity between affective and social disorders.
34914708|a|Choline is an essential component of Acetylcholine (ACh) biosynthesis pathway which requires high-affinity Choline transporter (ChT) for its uptake into the presynaptic terminals of cholinergic neurons. Previously, we had reported a predominant expression of ChT in memory processing and storing region of the Drosophila brain called mushroom bodies (MBs). It is unknown how ChT contributes to the functional principles of MB operation. Here, we demonstrate the role of ChT in Habituation, a non-associative form of learning. Odour driven habituation traces are laid down in ChT dependent manner in antennal lobes (AL), projection neurons (PNs), and MBs. We observed that reduced habituation due to knock-down of ChT in MBs causes hypersensitivity towards odour, suggesting that ChT also regulates incoming stimulus suppression. Importantly, we show for the first time that ChT is not unique to cholinergic neurons but is also required in inhibitory GABAergic neurons to drive habituation behaviour. Our results support a model in which ChT regulates both habituation and incoming stimuli through multiple circuit loci via an interplay between excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Strikingly, the lack of ChT in MBs shows characteristics similar to the major reported features of Autism spectrum disorders (ASD), including attenuated habituation, sensory hypersensitivity as well as defective GABAergic signalling. Our data establish the role of ChT in habituation and suggest that its dysfunction may contribute to neuropsychiatric disorders like ASD.
34914205|a|About 40 years have passed since "theory of mind (ToM)" research started. The false-belief test is used as a litmus test for ToM ability. The implicit false-belief test has renewed views of ToM in several disciplines, including psychology, psychiatry, and neuroscience. Many important questions have been considered via the paradigm of implicit false belief. We recently addressed the phylogenetic and physiological aspects of ToM using a version of this paradigm combined with the chemogenetic technique on Old World monkeys. We sought to create animal models for autism that exhibit behavioral phenotypes similar to human symptoms. The simultaneous manipulation of neural circuits and assessments of changes in phenotypes can help identify the causal neural substrate of ToM.
34914033|a|The radial migration of cortical pyramidal neurons (PNs) during corticogenesis is necessary for establishing a multilayered cerebral cortex. Neuronal migration defects are considered a critical etiology of neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), schizophrenia, epilepsy, and intellectual disability (ID). TRIO is a high-risk candidate gene for ASDs and ID. However, its role in embryonic radial migration and the etiology of ASDs and ID are not fully understood. In this study, we found that the in vivo conditional knockout or in utero knockout of Trio in excitatory precursors in the neocortex caused aberrant polarity and halted the migration of late-born PNs. Further investigation of the underlying mechanism revealed that the interaction of the Trio N-terminal SH3 domain with Myosin X mediated the adherence of migrating neurons to radial glial fibers through regulating the membrane location of neuronal cadherin (N-cadherin). Also, independent or synergistic overexpression of RAC1 and RHOA showed different phenotypic recoveries of the abnormal neuronal migration by affecting the morphological transition and/or the glial fiber-dependent locomotion. Taken together, our findings clarify a novel mechanism of Trio in regulating N-cadherin cell surface expression via the interaction of Myosin X with its N-terminal SH3 domain. These results suggest the vital roles of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor 1 (GEF1) and GEF2 domains in regulating radial migration by activating their Rho GTPase effectors in both distinct and cooperative manners, which might be associated with the abnormal phenotypes in neurodevelopmental disorders.
34914016|a|Interest in telehealth assessment for autism has increased due to COVID-19 and subsequent expansion of remote psychological services, though options that are easy for clinicians to adopt and available through the lifespan are limited. The Brief Observation of Symptoms of Autism (BOSA) provides a social context with standardized materials and activities that can be coded by clinicians trained in the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule. The current project examined psychometric properties to determine optimal use for each BOSA version. Three hundred and seven participants with 453 BOSAs were included to determine best performing items for algorithms, validity, sensitivity, specificity, recommended cut-offs, and proposed ranges of concern. While preliminary, the BOSA provides a promising new option for telehealth-administered assessment for autism.
34914003|a|Despite the high comorbidity, surprisingly little is known about the clinical features, treatment prognosis, and treatment mediators for youth with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) and Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). This study, the largest to date, compared 172 young people with OCD and ASD (OCD + ASD) to 447 without ASD (OCD) on clinical characteristics, finding those with OCD + ASD were more likely to endorse poorer insight into their OCD, have greater global functional impairment, greater levels of concurrent psychopathology, higher levels of family accommodation and to be on medication. Treatment outcomes following a course of Cognitive Behaviour Therapy with or without medication were explored for a subgroup; 100 young people with OCD + ASD and 223 with OCD. Whilst both groups benefitted from treatment, the OCD + ASD group had significantly poorer treatment outcomes. Greater global functional impairment and being on medication mediated the between-group difference in outcomes. Further research and treatment refinements are needed to improve outcomes for youth with OCD + ASD.
34913977|a|Importance: The risk of airflow limitation and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is influenced by combinations of cigarette smoking and genetic susceptibility, yet it remains unclear whether gene-by-smoking interactions are associated with quantitative measures of lung function. Objective: To assess the interaction of cigarette smoking and polygenic risk score in association with reduced lung function. Design, Setting, and Participants: This UK Biobank cohort study included UK citizens of European ancestry aged 40 to 69 years with genetic and spirometry data passing quality control metrics. Data was analyzed from July 2020 to March 2021. Exposures: PRS of combined forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and percent of forced vital capacity exhaled in the first second (FEV1/FVC), self-reported pack-years of smoking, ever- vs never-smoking status, and current- vs former- or never-smoking status. Main Outcomes and Measures: FEV1/FVC was the primary outcome. Models were used to test for interactions with models, including the main effects of PRS, different smoking variables, and their cross-product terms. The association between pack-years of smoking and FEV1/FVC were compared for those in the highest vs lowest decile of estimated genetic risk for low lung function. Results: We included 319 730 individuals, of whom 24 915 (8%) had moderate-to-severe COPD cases, and 44.4% were men. Participants had a mean (SD) age 56.5 of (8.02) years. The PRS and pack-years were significantly associated with lower FEV1/FVC (PRS: beta, -0.03; 95% CI, -0.031 to -0.03; pack-years: beta, -0.0064; 95% CI, -0.0064 to -0.0063) and the interaction term (beta, -0.0028; 95% CI, -0.0029 to -0.0026). A stepwise increment in estimated effect sizes for these interaction terms was observed per 10 pack-years of smoking exposure. The interaction of PRS with 11 to 20, 31 to 40, and more than 50 pack-years categories were beta (interaction) -0.0038 (95% CI, -0.0046 to -0.0031); -0.013 (95% CI, -0.014 to -0.012); and -0.017 (95% CI, -0.019 to -0.016), respectively. There was evidence of significant interaction between PRS with ever- or never- smoking status (beta, interaction; -0.0064; 95% CI, -0.0068 to -0.0060) and current or not-current smoking (beta, interaction; -0.0091; 95% CI, -0.0097 to -0.0084). For any given level of pack-years of smoking exposure, FEV1/FVC was significantly lower for individuals in the tenth decile (ie, highest risk) than the first decile (ie, lowest risk) of genetic risk. For every 20 pack-years of smoking, those in the tenth decile compared with the first decile of genetic risk showed nearly a 2-fold reduction in FEV1/FVC. Conclusions and Relevance: COPD is characterized by diminished lung function, and our analyses suggest there is substantial interaction between genome-wide PRS and smoking exposures. While smoking was associated with decreased lung function across all genetic risk categories, the associations were strongest in individuals with higher estimated genetic risk.
34913394|a|
34912368|a|The SH3 and multiple ankyrin repeat domains (SHANKs) are a family of scaffolding proteins located in excitatory synapses required for their development and function. Molecular defects of SHANK3 are a well-known cause of several neurodevelopmental entities, in particular autism spectrum disorders and epilepsy, whereas relatively little is known about disease associations of SHANK1. Here, we propose a novel de novo mosaic p.(Gly126Arg) SHANK1 variant as the monogenic cause of disease in a patient who presented, from the age of 2 years, moderate intellectual disability, autism, and refractory epilepsy of the Lennox-Gastaut type. The epilepsy responded remarkably well to cannabidiol add-on therapy. In silico analyses including homology modeling and molecular dynamics simulations indicated the deleterious effect of SHANK1 p.(Gly126Arg) on the protein structure and the related function associated with protein-protein interactions. In particular, the variant was predicted to disrupt a hitherto unknown conserved region of SHANK1 protein with high homology to a recently recognized functionally relevant domain in SHANK3 implicated in ligand binding, including the "non-canonical" binding of Rap1.
34912193|a|Preclinical studies suggest that repeated exposure to anesthetics during a critical period of neurodevelopment induces long-term changes in synaptic transmission, plasticity, and behavior. Such changes are of great concern, as similar changes have also been identified in animal models of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) such as autism. Because of overlapping synaptic changes, it is also possible that anesthetic exposures have a more significant effect in individuals diagnosed with NDDs. Thus, we evaluated the effects of early, multiple anesthetic exposures in BTBR mice, an inbred strain that displays autistic behavior. We discovered that three cycles of sevoflurane anesthesia (2.5%, 1 h) with 2-h intervals between each exposure in late postnatal BTBR mice did not aggravate, but instead improved pathophysiological mechanisms involved with autistic behavior. Sevoflurane exposures restored E/I balance (by increasing inhibitory synaptic transmission), and increased mitochondrial respiration and BDNF signaling in BTBR mice. Most importantly, such changes were associated with reduced autistic behavior in BTBR mice, as sociability was increased in the three-chamber test and repetitive behavior was reduced in the self-grooming test. Our results suggest that anesthetic exposures during neurodevelopment may affect individuals diagnosed with NDDs differently.
34912192|a|
34911609|a|OBJECTIVES: To study the efficacy of family rehabilitation treatment performed by parents under the guidance of professionals in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). METHODS: In the prospective study, 60 children with ASD, aged 24-60 months, were randomly divided into an observation group and a conventional group. The parents of the children in the conventional group received an online training on basic knowledge and rehabilitation training of ASD alone, and those in the observation group received the online training and performed family rehabilitation treatment under the guidance of a professional team. Psycho-Education Profile Third Edition (PEP-3) and Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) were used to evaluate the changes in related abilities after intervention. RESULTS: After 6 months of intervention, the scores of all dimensions of the PEP-3 scale in the observation group and most dimensions of the conventional group significantly increased (P<0.01); the CARS scale scores of the two groups significantly decreased (P<0.05). Compared with the conventional group, the observation group had significant increases in the scores of the dimensions of language understanding, language expression, gross motor, fine motor, self-care ability of daily living (P<0.05), and adaptive behavior (P<0.05), as well as a significant reduction in the CARS score (P<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: An online training on basic knowledge and rehabilitation training of ASD for parents can improve the abilities and core clinical symptoms of children with ASD. The family rehabilitation treatment model with a team of professionals as the resource platform and parents as the performer has a more significant efficacy on improving the language, sports, and other abilities and alleviating the severity of the symptoms in children with ASD.
34911608|a|OBJECTIVES: To study the changes in biochemical metabolites in the thalamus and the cerebellum and their association with clinical features in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). METHODS: In this prospective study, magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) with point-resolved spatial selection was used to analyze the thalamus and the cerebellum at both sides in 50 children with ASD aged 2-6 years. Creatine (Cr) was as the internal standard to measure the relative values of N-acetylaspartate (NAA)/Cr, choline (Cho)/Cr, myoinositol (MI)/Cr, and glutamine and glutamate complex (Glx)/Cr, and the differences in metabolites and their association with clinical symptoms were compared. RESULTS: In the children with ASD, NAA/Cr in the left thalamus was positively correlated with the scores of hearing-language and hand-eye coordination in the Griffiths Development Scales-Chinese (P<0.05). Cho/Cr in the right cerebellum was positively correlated with the scores of personal-social competence, hearing-language, and hand-eye coordination (P<0.05). NAA/Cr and Glx/Cr in the left thalamus were positively correlated with those in the left cerebellum (P<0.05). There was no significant difference in metabolites between the left and right sides of the thalamus and the cerebellum in the children with ASD (P>0.05). CONCLUSIONS: There are metabolic disorders in the cerebellum and the thalamus in children with ASD, and there is a correlation between the changes of metabolites in the left cerebellum and the left thalamus. Some metabolic indexes are related to the clinical symptoms of ASD. MRS may reveal the pathological basis of ASD and provide a basis for diagnosis and prognosis assessment of ASD as a noninvasive and quantitative detection method.
34911593|a|BACKGROUND: Although the ICD and DSM differentiate between different psychiatric disorders, these often share symptoms, risk factors, and treatments. This was a population-based, case-control, sibling study examining familial clustering of all psychiatric disorders and low IQ, using data from the Israel Draft-Board Registry on all Jewish adolescents assessed between 1998 and 2014. METHODS: We identified all cases with autism spectrum disorder (ASD, N = 2128), severe intellectual disability (ID, N = 9572), attention-deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD) (N = 3272), psychotic (N = 7902), mood (N = 9704), anxiety (N = 10 606), personality (N = 24 816), or substance/alcohol abuse (N = 791) disorders, and low IQ (>=2 SDs below the population mean, N = 31 186). Non-CNS control disorders were adolescents with Type-1 diabetes (N = 2427), hernia (N = 29 558) or hematological malignancies (N = 931). Each case was matched with 10 age-matched controls selected at random from the Draft-Board Registry, with replacement, and for each case and matched controls, we ascertained all full siblings. The main outcome measure was the relative recurrence risk (RRR) of the sibling of a case having the same (within-disorder RRR) or a different (across-disorder RRR) disorder. RESULTS: Within-disorder RRRs were increased for all diagnostic categories, ranging from 11.53 [95% confidence interval (CI): 9.23-14.40] for ASD to 2.93 (95% CI: 2.80-3.07) for personality disorders. The median across-disorder RRR between any pair of psychiatric disorders was 2.16 (95% CI: 1.45-2.43); the median RRR between low IQ and any psychiatric disorder was 1.37 (95% CI: 0.93-1.98). There was no consistent increase in across-disorder RRRs between the non-CNS disorders and psychiatric disorders and/or low IQ. CONCLUSION: These large population-based study findings suggest shared etiologies among most psychiatric disorders, and low IQ.
34911567|a|INTRODUCTION: Autism spectrum disorder is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by deficits in communication, social interaction, restricted interest, and repetitive behaviors. Although more cases are being diagnosed, no drugs are approved to treat the core symptoms or cognitive and behavioral problems associated with autism. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop an effective and safe treatment. OBJECTIVE: In this study, we aim to share our 2-year experience with CBD-enriched cannabis treatment in autism and review the latest studies. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study included 33 (27 males, six females) children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder who were followed up between January 2018 and August 2020. The mean age was 7.7 +- 5.5 years. The average daily dosage of cannabidiol (CBD) was 0.7 mg/kg/day (0.3-2 mg/kg/day). The median duration of treatment was 6.5 months (3-28 months). The preparations used in this study contained full-spectrum CBD and trace elements tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) of less than 3%. RESULTS: The outcomes were evaluated before and after treatment based on clinical interviews. At each follow-up visit, parents were asked to evaluate the effectiveness of the CBD-enriched cannabis treatment. According to the parents' reports, no change in daily life activity was reported in 6 (19.35%) patients. The main improvements of the treatment were as follows: a decrease in behavioral problems was reported in 10 patients (32.2%), an increase in expressive language was reported in 7 patients (22.5%), improved cognition was reported in 4 patients (12,9%), an increase in social interaction was reported in 3 patients (9.6%), and a decrease in stereotypes was reported in 1 patient (3.2%). The parents reported improvement in cognition among patients who adhered to CBD-enriched cannabis treatment for over two years. The antipsychotic drug could be stopped only in one patient who showed mild ASD symptoms. No change could be made in other drug use and doses. Additionally, this study includes an extensive review of the literature regarding CBD treatment in autism spectrum disorder. According to recent studies, the average dose of CBD was 3.8+-2.6 mg/kg/day. The ratio of CBD to THC in the used preparations was 20:1. The most significant improvements were seen in the behavioral problems reported in 20-70% of the patients. CONCLUSION: Using lower doses of CBD and trace THC seems to be promising in managing behavioral problems associated with autism. In addition, this treatment could be effective in managing the core symptoms and cognitive functions. No significant side effects were seen at the low doses of CBD-enriched cannabis when compared to other studies.
34911565|a|BACKGROUND: The neurocognitive mechanisms underlying autism spectrum disorder (ASD) remain unclear. Progress has been largely hampered by small sample sizes, variable age ranges and resulting inconsistent findings. There is a pressing need for large definitive studies to delineate the nature and extent of key case/control differences to direct research towards fruitful areas for future investigation. Here we focus on perception of biological motion, a promising index of social brain function which may be altered in ASD. In a large sample ranging from childhood to adulthood, we assess whether biological motion preference differs in ASD compared to neurotypical participants (NT), how differences are modulated by age and sex and whether they are associated with dimensional variation in concurrent or later symptomatology. METHODS: Eye-tracking data were collected from 486 6-to-30-year-old autistic (N = 282) and non-autistic control (N = 204) participants whilst they viewed 28 trials pairing biological (BM) and control (non-biological, CTRL) motion. Preference for the biological motion stimulus was calculated as (1) proportion looking time difference (BM-CTRL) and (2) peak look duration difference (BM-CTRL). RESULTS: The ASD group showed a present but weaker preference for biological motion than the NT group. The nature of the control stimulus modulated preference for biological motion in both groups. Biological motion preference did not vary with age, gender, or concurrent or prospective social communicative skill within the ASD group, although a lack of clear preference for either stimulus was associated with higher social-communicative symptoms at baseline. LIMITATIONS: The paired visual preference we used may underestimate preference for a stimulus in younger and lower IQ individuals. Our ASD group had a lower average IQ by approximately seven points. 18% of our sample was not analysed for various technical and behavioural reasons. CONCLUSIONS: Biological motion preference elicits small-to-medium-sized case-control effects, but individual differences do not strongly relate to core social autism associated symptomatology. We interpret this as an autistic difference (as opposed to a deficit) likely manifest in social brain regions. The extent to which this is an innate difference present from birth and central to the autistic phenotype, or the consequence of a life lived with ASD, is unclear.
34911436|a|BACKGROUND: Sex chromosome aneuploidies (SCAs) are a collectively common family of genetic disorders that increase the risk for neuropsychiatric and cognitive impairment. Beyond being important medical disorders in their own right, SCAs also offer a unique naturally occurring model for studying X- and Y-chromosome influences on the human brain. However, it remains unclear if (i) different SCAs are associated with different profiles of psychopathology and (ii) the notable interindividual variation in psychopathology is related to co-occurring variation in cognitive ability. METHODS: We examined scores for 11 dimensions of psychopathology [Child/Adult Behavior Checklist (CBCL)] and general cognitive ability [full-scale IQ (FSIQ) from Wechsler tests] in 110 youth with varying SCAs (XXY = 41, XYY = 22, XXX = 27, XXYY = 20) and 131 typically developing controls (XX = 59, XY = 72). RESULTS: All SCAs were associated with elevated CBCL scores across several dimensions of psychopathology (two-sample t tests comparing the euploidic and aneuploidic groups [all  T  > 9, and p < 0.001]). Social and attentional functioning were particularly sensitive to the carriage of a supernumerary Y-chromosome. In particular, the XYY group evidenced significantly more social problems than both extra-X groups (Cohen's d effect size > 0.5, Bonferroni corrected p < .05). There was marked variability in CBCL scores within each SCA group, which generally correlated negatively with IQ, but most strongly so for social and attentional difficulties (standardized beta, - 0.3). These correlations showed subtle differences as a function of the SCA group and CBCL scale. CONCLUSIONS: There is domain-specific variation in psychopathology across SCA groups and domain-specific correlation between psychopathology and IQ within SCAs. These findings (i) help to tailor clinical assessment of this common and impactful family of genetic disorders and (ii) suggest that dosage abnormalities of X- and Y-linked genes impart somewhat distinct profiles of neuropsychiatric risk.
34911200|a|Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are a set of neurodevelopmental conditions characterised by difficulties in social interaction and communication as well as stereotyped and restricted patterns of interest. Autistic traits exist in a continuum across the general population, whilst the extreme end of this distribution is diagnosed as clinical ASD. While many studies have investigated brain structure in autism using a case-control design, few have used a dimensional approach. To add to this growing body of literature, we investigated the structural brain correlates of autistic traits in a mixed sample of adult participants (25 ASD and 66 neurotypicals; age: 18-60 years). We examined the relationship between regional brain volumes (using voxel-based morphometry and surface-based morphometry) and white matter microstructure properties (using Diffusion Tensor Imaging) and autistic traits (using Autism Spectrum Quotient). Our findings show grey matter differences in regions including the orbitofrontal cortex and lingual gyrus, and suggestive evidence for white matter microstructure differences in tracts including the superior longitudinal fasciculus being related to higher autistic traits. These grey matter and white matter microstructure findings from our study are consistent with previous reports and support the brain structural differences in ASD. These findings provide further support for shared aetiology for autistic traits across the diagnostic divide.
34911194|a|BACKGROUND: Despite decades of research, there is continued uncertainty regarding whether autism is associated with a specific profile of gray matter (GM) structure. This inconsistency may stem from the widespread use of voxel-based morphometry (VBM) methods that combine indices of GM density and GM volume. If GM density or volume, but not both, prove different in autism, the traditional VBM approach of combining the two indices may obscure the difference. The present study measures GM density and volume separately to examine whether autism is associated with alterations in GM volume, density, or both. METHODS: Differences in MRI-based GM density and volume were examined in 6-25 year-olds with a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (n = 213, 80.8% male, IQ 47-154) and a typically developing (TD) sample (n = 190, 71.6% male, IQ 67-155). High-resolution T1-weighted anatomical images were collected on a single MRI scanner. Regional density and volume were estimated via whole-brain parcellation comprised of 1625 parcels. Parcel-wise analyses were conducted using generalized additive models while controlling the false discovery rate (FDR, q < 0.05). Volume differences in the 68-region Desikan-Killiany atlas derived from Freesurfer were also examined, to establish the generalizability of findings across methods. RESULTS: No density differences were observed between the autistic and TD groups, either in individual parcels or whole brain mean density. Increased volume was observed in autism compared to the TD group when controlling for Age, Sex, and IQ, both at the level of the whole brain (total volume) and in 45 parcels (2.8% of total parcels). Parcels with greater volume included inferior, middle, and superior temporal gyrus, inferior and superior frontal gyrus, precuneus, and fusiform gyrus. Converging evidence from a standard Freesurfer pipeline also identified greater volume in a number of overlapping regions. LIMITATIONS: The method for determining "density" is not a direct measure of neuronal density, and this study cannot reveal underlying cellular differences. While this study represents possibly the largest single-site sample of its kind, it is underpowered to detect very small differences. CONCLUSIONS: These results provide compelling evidence that autism is associated with regional GM volumetric differences, which are more prominent than density differences. This underscores the importance of examining volume and density separately, and suggests that direct measures of volume (e.g. region-of-interest or tensor-based morphometry approaches) may be more sensitive to autism-relevant differences in neuroanatomy than concentration/density-based approaches.
34911009|a|This study aimed to investigate the functional imaging associations of autism in individuals with special educational needs and demonstrate the feasibility of such research. The study included 18 individuals (3 female,15 male; mean age 24.3; mean IQ 69.7) with special educational needs (SEN), of whom 9 met criteria for autism. The task examined the Blood-oxygen-level dependant response to fearful and neutral faces. Individuals in the autism group had 2 clusters of significantly reduced activity centred on the left superior frontal gyrus and left angular gyrus compared to those with SEN alone in response to the fearful faces. In the response to neutral faces, individuals in the autism group also had a cluster of significantly greater activity centred on the right precentral gyrus compared to those with SEN alone. We suggest that autistic characteristics in individuals with SEN are associated with changes in fearful facial emotion processing analogous to those previously reported in autistic individuals without SEN, and who are of average or above average cognitive ability. The finding of enhanced response to neutral facial stimuli needs further investigation, although we speculate this may relate to reports of the experience of 'hyper-mentalisation' in social situations as reported by some autistic individuals.
34910374|a|Although good quality housing and a socially cohesive neighborhood are associated with a higher well-being in the general population, housing is a rarely studied topic in autism research. In the present study, we describe the housing situation of a large sample of adults with autism and mostly (above) average intellectual abilities (n = 1429; 17 to 84 years), and examine predictors of independent living, accommodation satisfaction, neighborhood satisfaction, and satisfaction with life based on an online survey. The outcomes of independently living adults were compared with those from a Dutch community sample (n = 929). Nearly 80% of the autistic adults lived independently. Older participants, women, and those with higher self-reported IQ's were more likely to live independently. Autistic adults living independently were equally satisfied with their accommodation and neighborhood as the comparison group, but were less satisfied with their life in general. In both groups, higher satisfaction with accommodation and neighborhood was associated with higher life satisfaction. We advocate further research to better understand and anticipate the housing needs of the growing group of adults with autism. LAY SUMMARY: The living situation of autistic adults has rarely been studied. We found that 79% of autistic adults with mostly (above) average intellectual abilities lived independently. Women, older adults, and those with higher IQ's were more likely to live independently. They were equally pleased with their house and neighborhood as adults from a Dutch community sample, but autistic adults were less satisfied with their life in general.
34910260|a|Electrical recordings of neural mass activity, such as local field potentials (LFPs) and electroencephalograms (EEGs), have been instrumental in studying brain function. However, these aggregate signals lack cellular resolution and thus are not easy to be interpreted directly in terms of parameters of neural microcircuits. Developing tools for a reliable estimation of key neural parameters from these signals, such as the interaction between excitation and inhibition or the level of neuromodulation, is important for both neuroscientific and clinical applications. Over the years, we have developed tools based on neural network modeling and computational analysis of empirical data to estimate neural parameters from aggregate neural signals. This review article gives an overview of the main computational tools that we have developed and employed to invert LFPs and EEGs in terms of circuit-level neural phenomena, and outlines future challenges and directions for future research.
34910250|a|BACKGROUND: This study aims to compare the effects of neurofeedback training on male and female adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Furthermore, it examines sex differences regarding improvements in co-occurring psychopathological symptoms, cognitive flexibility and emotion recognition abilities. The study might provide first hints whether there is an influence of sex on treatment outcomes. METHODS: Six female and six male adolescents with ASD were matched according to age, IQ and symptom severity. All participants received 24 sessions of electroencephalography-based neurofeedback training. Before and after the intervention, psychological data for measuring co-occurring psychopathological symptoms as well as behavioral data for measuring cognitive flexibility and emotion recognition abilities were recorded. RESULTS: Caregivers rated statistically significant higher psychopathological problems in female than in male adolescents with ASD at baseline. Apart from that, no statistically significant sex-related differences were revealed in this sample; however, male adolescents tended to report greater improvements of externalizing, internalizing and total symptoms, whereas females experienced smaller improvements of externalizing and total problems, but no improvements of internalizing problems. Regarding caregivers' assessments, more improvement of total problems was reported for females. For males, only improvements of internalizing and total problems were described. CONCLUSION: This study reveals preliminary results that sex-related differences might play a role when evaluating treatment outcomes after neurofeedback training regarding comorbid psychopathological symptoms. Adolescents' self-report and parental assessments, especially concerning psychopathological symptoms, should be combined and considered in future studies to help prevent sex bias in adolescents with ASD.
34908837|a|In developmental biology, transcription factors are involved in regulating the process of neural development, controlling the differentiation of nerve cells, and affecting the normal functioning of neural circuits. Transcription factors regulate the expression of multiple genes at the same time and have become a key gene category that is recognized to be disrupted in neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism spectrum disorders. This paper briefly introduces the expression and role of PAX2 in neurodevelopment and discusses the neurodevelopmental disorders associated with Pax2 mutations and its possible mechanism. Firstly, mutations in the human Pax2 gene are associated with abnormalities in multiple systems which can result in neurodevelopmental disorders such as intellectual disability, epilepsy and autism spectrum disorders. Secondly, the structure of Pax2 gene and PAX2 protein, as well as the function of Pax2 gene in neural development, was discussed. Finally, a diagram of the PAX2 protein regulatory network was made and a possible molecular mechanism of Pax2 mutations leading to neurodevelopmental disorders from the perspectives of developmental process and protein function was proposed.
34908715|a|Since decades, there is a change in concept of the gut-brain axis. There is differential increase in evidences focusing on the bidirectional communication between the gut microbiome and the brain. It supports existence of far-reaching model of "gut-brain axis." This axis is attaining more adherence to fields investigating biological and physiological footing of psychiatric, neuro-developmental, age-related, and neurodegenerative disorders. Many factors can change microbiota composition in early life as well as with the increasing age. Stress can affect the microbiota-gut-brain axis at every stages of life. Recent advances have involved the gut microbiota in many conditions including severe mental illness, autism, anxiety, obesity, Parkinson's disease, and Alzheimer's disease. The current studies target on elaborating the underlying mechanisms of microbiota-gut-brain axis and attempt to exemplify intervention and therapeutic strategies for neuropsychiatric disorders.
34908527|a|Although many genes are known to influence sleep, when and how they impact sleep-regulatory circuits remain ill-defined. Here we show that Insomniac (Inc), a conserved adaptor for the autism-associated Cul3 ubiquitin ligase, acts in a restricted period of neuronal development to impact sleep in adult Drosophila. The loss of inc causes structural and functional alterations within the mushroom body, a center for sensory integration, associative learning, and sleep regulation. In inc mutants, mushroom body neurons are produced in excess, develop anatomical defects that impede circuit assembly, and are unable to promote sleep when activated in adulthood. Our findings link neurogenesis and postmitotic development of sleep-regulatory neurons to their adult function and suggest that developmental perturbations of circuits that couple sensory inputs and sleep may underlie sleep dysfunction in neurodevelopmental disorders.
34908250|a|Visual evoked potentials (VEPs) provide a means to examine neural mechanisms in autism with high temporal resolution. Conventional VEP analysis relies on subjective inspection of a few points (peaks and troughs) in the time-domain waveform. The current study applied power spectral analysis and magnitude-squared coherence (MSC) statistics (frequency-domain measures) to VEPs recorded during 1-minute runs and with a recently developed short-duration technique that allow for objective examination of the responses (Zemon & Gordon, European Journal of Neuroscience, 2018, 48, 1765-1788) from nonautistic and autistic children. Results indicate that, for both groups, early time-domain measures (P60 , N75 , P100 ) are highly correlated with middle- and high-frequency (14-28 and 30-48 Hz, respectively) mechanisms, and late measures are highly correlated with a low-frequency (6-12 Hz) mechanism. One frequency-domain measure (power in the middle-frequency band) is capable of predicting the key amplitude measure (N75 -P100 ) with high accuracy. MSC and power measures were combined to yield separate measures of signal and noise strength to evaluate alternate hypotheses in autism. Linear mixed-effects modeling demonstrated selective differences in early time-domain and middle-to-high frequency-domain measures in autistic children as compared to nonautistic children given both recording techniques, implicating weaker excitatory input to the cortex. Receiver-operating-characteristic curve analysis showed predictive diagnostic accuracy for middle- and high-frequency bands based on MSC. These findings support the value of frequency analysis measures (power spectral analysis and MSC) in the objective examination of neural differences in autism. LAY SUMMARY: Visual evoked potentials (VEPs) are used to assess neural mechanisms. Typically, VEPs are analyzed by subjective examination of time-series waveforms; but here objective techniques were applied to quantify VEP frequency components to investigate neural differences between autistic and nonautistic children. The objective measures demonstrate group differences in brain function that point to weaker excitatory input to the cortex in autism.
34908248|a|AIM: Inefficient management is one of the major barriers to development of in-home care in the society. Accordingly, the present study aims to identify the barriers to efficient management of home care nursing using a qualitative approach. DESIGN: The present study is a qualitative-descriptive work of research. METHOD: Data were collected using semi-structured, in-depth, individual interviews with 19 nurses from November 2020 to May 2021. The collected data were analysed using Graneheim and Lundman's method. RESULTS: The findings of the study were categorized into four main themes, namely lack of effective standards, ineffective interactions, inappropriate cultural/social context and professional issues, and 15 subthemes. CONCLUSION: In-home care nurses in Iran experience various problems in their practice. Creating an appropriate cultural/social context in Iranian societies, providing the necessary infrastructure, including insurance, providing comprehensive, clear guidelines for in-home care, encouraging teamwork and organizing workshops to promote effective interactions between the personnel and patients can improve the quality of in-home care nursing.
34908218|a|22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome (22q11DS) is a genetic syndrome caused by a chromosomal microdeletion. It affects approximately 1 in 850-992 pregnancies, and its clinical manifestations include congenital heart disease, gastrointestinal symptoms, and psychiatric illnesses. The study examined the relationship between adaptive behavior and functional outcomes, educational attainment, employment, and independent living, and whether age, gender, intellectual disability, presence of psychiatric disorder, and close friendships could predict levels of adaptive behavior. Parents of adults with 22q11DS (n = 101; 48 male and 54 female) completed the Waisman Activities of Daily Living Scale, demographic details, and questions elicited employment, education, and relationships status. Analysis conducted in SPSS, included descriptive statistics, measures of association, Analysis of Variance, logistic and linear regressions. Differences in levels of overall adaptive behavior were found regarding employment and living status, but not in educational attainment. Having close friendships was associated with adaptive behavior as well as the likelihood of living independently. Further research is needed, ideally using prospective designs and purposive sampling strategies. This needs to examine how social and communication deficits impact relationship building and how they are affected by the clinical manifestations of 22q11DS. It also needs to focus on how different social structures interface with levels of adaptive behavior.
34907998|a|OBJECTIVES: Training primary care providers to provide diagnostic assessments for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) decreases wait times and improves diagnostic access. Outcomes related to the quality of these assessments and the impacts on system capacity have not been systematically examined. This systematic review identifies and summarizes published studies that included ASD diagnostic training for primary care providers (PCPs) and aims to guide future training and evaluation methods. METHODS: Systematic searches of electronic databases, reference lists, and journals identified 6 studies that met 3 inclusion criteria: training for PCPs, community setting, and training outcome(s) reported. These studies were critically reviewed to characterize (1) study design, (2) training model, and (3) outcomes. RESULTS: All studies were either pre-post design or nonrandomized trials with a relatively small number of participants. There was considerable heterogeneity among studies regarding the training provided and the program evaluation process. The most evaluated outcomes were access to autism diagnosis and accuracy of diagnosis. CONCLUSION: Training PCPs to make ASD diagnoses can yield high diagnostic agreement with specialty teams' assessments and reduce diagnostic wait times. Current data are limited by small sample size, poor to fair quality study methodology, and heterogenous study designs and outcome evaluations. Evidence is insufficient to draw conclusions about the overall effects of training PCPs for ASD diagnostic assessments. Since further research is still needed, this review highlights which outcomes are relevant to consider when evaluating the quality of ASD assessments across the continuum of approaches.
34907815|a|Forensic mental health services in high income countries are typically high cost and low volume, providing care to people with mental illness, personality disorders, learning disability and autism deemed to pose a risk to others. Research into how forensic mental health services work as a whole system is limited. Such research is urgently needed to guide policy makers and ensure that services operate effectively.
34907708|a|The aim of the present research has been to determine whether there is a relationship between brain abnormalities found on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and autistic psychopathology. A retrospective analysis covering a period between 1998 and 2015 included 489 children with autism (404 boys, 85 girls; average age 8.0 +- 4.2 years) who underwent an MRI of the brain. For clinical diagnosis of autism, the International Classification of Diseases, 10th revision (ICD-10), was used. Autistic psychopathology was evaluated by means of the Autism Diagnostic Interview - Revised. The Spearman nonparametric correlation analysis and chi-square test were used to examine the possible relationships between variables. The group of autistic children did not manifest a statistically significant correlation between the parameters examined on MRI and autistic psychopathology. A correlation between other cysts and repetitive behavior was significant only at trend level (P = 0.054). Gliosis of the brain was significantly more frequent in autistic children with mental retardation than in children without mental retardation (14.1% vs. 7.4%; P = 0.028). Nonmyelinated areas in the brain were significantly more frequent in autistic children with autistic regression than in children without autistic regression (29.9% vs. 15.7%; P = 0.008). Mental retardation was significantly more frequent in autistic children with autistic regression than in children without regression (73.2% vs. 52.5%; P = 0.002). Our research study did not reveal a statistically significant correlation of brain abnormalities on MRI with autistic psychopathology.
34907624|a|BACKGROUND: This systematic review aimed to explore how adults with autism participate in the community, the impact of community participation on quality of life and mental health, and factors that support and hinder participation. METHOD: A systematic review was conducted including studies published from inception to 17 January 2021. RESULTS: Sixty-three reports were included, reporting on 58 studies. Solitary activities, organised group activities, community activities, religious groups and online social participation were identified. The relationship between community participation and quality of life was examined. Barriers and facilitators to increased community participation were identified. Most studies had a moderate to high risk of bias. CONCLUSION: Adults with autism participate in a range of independent and community activities. The impact of community participation on quality of life and mental health warrants further exploration. Future studies should find effective ways of supporting adults with autism to participate in the community.
34907471|a|Bain type of X-linked syndromic intellectual developmental disorder, caused by pathogenic missense variants in HRNRPH2, was initially described in six female individuals affected by moderate-to-severe neurodevelopmental delay. Although it was initially postulated that the condition would not be compatible with life in males, several affected male individuals harboring pathogenic variants in HNRNPH2 have since been documented. However, functional in-vitro analyses of identified variants have not been performed and, therefore, possible genotype-phenotype correlations remain elusive. Here, we present eight male individuals, including a pair of monozygotic twins, harboring pathogenic or likely pathogenic HNRNPH2 variants. Notably, we present the first individuals harboring nonsense or frameshift variants who, similarly to an individual harboring a de novo p.(Arg29Cys) variant within the first quasi-RNA-recognition motif (qRRM), displayed mild developmental delay, and developed mostly autistic features and/or psychiatric co-morbidities. Additionally, we present two individuals harboring a recurrent de novo p.(Arg114Trp), within the second qRRM, who had a severe neurodevelopmental delay with seizures. Functional characterization of the three most common HNRNPH2 missense variants revealed dysfunctional nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of proteins harboring the p.(Arg206Gln) and p.(Pro209Leu) variants, located within the nuclear localization signal, whereas proteins with p.(Arg114Trp) showed reduced interaction with members of the large assembly of splicing regulators (LASR). Moreover, RNA-sequencing of primary fibroblasts of the individual harboring the p.(Arg114Trp) revealed substantial alterations in the regulation of alternative splicing along with global transcriptome changes. Thus, we further expand the clinical and variant spectrum in HNRNPH2-associated disease in males and provide novel molecular insights suggesting the disorder to be a spliceopathy on the molecular level.
34907053|a|OBJECTIVES: Waiting times in the UK for an autism diagnostic assessment have increased rapidly in the last 5 years. This review explored research (including 'grey' literature) to uncover the current evidence base about autism diagnostic pathways and what works best, for whom and in what circumstances, to deliver high quality and timely diagnosis. DESIGN: We performed a Rapid Realist Review consistent with recognised standards for realist syntheses. We collected 129 grey literature and policy/guidelines and 220 articles from seven databases (January 2011-December 2019). We developed programme theories of how, why and in what contexts an intervention worked, based on cross comparison and synthesis of evidence. The focus was on identifying factors that contributed to a clearly defined intervention (the diagnostic pathway), associated with specific outcomes (high quality and timely), within specific parameters (Autism diagnostic services in Paediatric and Child & Adolescent Mental Health services in the UK). Our Expert Stakeholder Group, including representatives from local parent forums, national advocacy groups and clinicians, was integral to the process. RESULTS: Based on 45 relevant articles, we identified 7 programme theories that were integral to the process of diagnostic service delivery. Four were related to the clinical pathway: initial recognition of possible autism; referral and triaging; diagnostic model; and providing feedback to parents. Three programme theories were pertinent to all stages of the referral and diagnostic process: working in partnership with families; interagency working; and training, service evaluation and development. CONCLUSIONS: This theory informed review of childhood autism diagnostic pathways identified important aspects that may contribute to efficient, high quality and family-friendly service delivery. The programme theories will be further tested through a national survey of current practice and in-depth longitudinal case studies of exemplar services. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT04422483.
34906999|a|Aberrant dopamine (DA) signaling is associated with several psychiatric disorders such as bipolar disorder, addiction, and Parkinson's disease, and several medications that target the DA transporter (DAT) can induce or treat these disorders. Biochemical and crystallographic studies demonstrate that the competitive actions of DAT antagonists and substrates, such as cocaine and D-amphetamine (AMPH), rely on interactions with the transporter's substrate binding site. Agents that exhibit noncompetitive, allosteric modulation of DAT remain a significant topic of investigation, owing to their potential therapeutic applications. We previously identified a novel allosteric modulator of human DAT, KM822, that can decrease the affinity of cocaine for DAT and attenuate cocaine-elicited behaviors, though whether DAT is the sole mediator of KM822 actions in vivo is unproven given the large number of potential off-target sites. The function of C. elegans DAT (DAT-1) has been well characterized and used in both genetic and pharmacological studies of psychostimulant action and transporter regulation. Here, we provide in silico and in vitro evidence that the allosteric site engaged by KM822 is conserved between human DAT and DAT-1 and that KM822 interacts with DAT-1. Through a combination of genetic and pharmacological in vivo approaches we provide evidence that the ability of KM822 to diminish the behavioral actions of AMPH arises through its allosteric modulation of DAT-1. More broadly, our findings demonstrate allosteric modulation of DAT as a behavior modifying strategy and suggests that C. elegans can be operationalized to identify and investigate the interactions of DAT allosteric modulators. Significance Statement We previously demonstrated that the DAT allosteric modulator KM822 decreases cocaine affinity for human DAT. Here, using in silico and in vivo genetic approaches, we extend this finding to interactions with amphetamine (AMPH), demonstrating evolutionary conservation of the DAT allosteric site. In C. elegans, we report that KM822 suppresses AMPH behavioral effects via specific interactions with DAT-1. Our findings reveal C. elegans as a new tool to study allosteric modulation of DAT and its behavioral consequences.
34906613|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a highly heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by deficits in social communication and by patterns of restricted interests and/or repetitive behaviors. The Simons Foundation Autism Research Initiative's Human Gene and CNV Modules now list over 1,000 genes implicated in ASD and over 2,000 copy number variant loci reported in individuals with ASD. Given this ever-growing list of genetic changes associated with ASD, it has become evident that there is likely not a single genetic cause of this disorder nor a single neurobiological basis of this disorder. Instead, it is likely that many different neurobiological perturbations (which may represent subtypes of ASD) can result in the set of behavioral symptoms that we called ASD. One such of possible subtype of ASD may be associated with dopamine dysfunction. Precise regulation of synaptic dopamine (DA) is required for reward processing and behavioral learning, behaviors which are disrupted in ASD. Here we review evidence for DA dysfunction in ASD and in animal models of ASD. Further, we propose that these studies provide a scaffold for scientists and clinicians to consider subcategorizing the ASD diagnosis based on the genetic changes, neurobiological difference, and behavioral features identified in individuals with ASD.
34906521|a|
34906501|a|PURPOSE: This study aimed to describe a multisystemic disorder featuring cardiovascular, facial, musculoskeletal, and cutaneous anomalies caused by heterozygous loss-of-function variants in TAB2. METHODS: Affected individuals were analyzed by next-generation technologies and genomic array. The presumed loss-of-function effect of identified variants was assessed by luciferase assay in cells transiently expressing TAB2 deleterious alleles. In available patients' fibroblasts, variant pathogenicity was further explored by immunoblot and osteoblast differentiation assays. The transcriptomic profile of fibroblasts was investigated by RNA sequencing. RESULTS: A total of 11 individuals from 8 families were heterozygotes for a novel TAB2 variant. In total, 7 variants were predicted to be null alleles and 1 was a missense change. An additional subject was heterozygous for a 52 kb microdeletion involving TAB2 exons 1 to 3. Luciferase assay indicated a decreased transcriptional activation mediated by NF-kappaB signaling for all point variants. Immunoblot analysis showed a reduction of TAK1 phosphorylation while osteoblast differentiation was impaired. Transcriptomic analysis identified deregulation of multiple pleiotropic pathways, such as TGFbeta-, Ras-MAPK-, and Wnt-signaling networks. CONCLUSION: Our data defined a novel disorder associated with loss-of-function or, more rarely, hypomorphic alleles in a restricted linker region of TAB2. The pleiotropic manifestations in this disorder partly recapitulate the 6q25.1 (TAB2) microdeletion syndrome and deserve the definition of cardio-facial-cutaneous-articular syndrome.
34906484|a|PURPOSE: Although the introduction of exome sequencing (ES) has led to the diagnosis of a significant portion of patients with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), the diagnostic yield in actual clinical practice has remained stable at approximately 30%. We hypothesized that improving the selection of patients to test on the basis of their phenotypic presentation will increase diagnostic yield and therefore reduce unnecessary genetic testing. METHODS: We tested 4 machine learning methods and developed PredWES from these: a statistical model predicting the probability of a positive ES result solely on the basis of the phenotype of the patient. RESULTS: We first trained the tool on 1663 patients with NDDs and subsequently showed that diagnostic ES on the top 10% of patients with the highest probability of a positive ES result would provide a diagnostic yield of 56%, leading to a notable 114% increase. Inspection of our model revealed that for patients with NDDs, comorbid abnormal (lower) muscle tone and microcephaly positively correlated with a conclusive ES diagnosis, whereas autism was negatively associated with a molecular diagnosis. CONCLUSION: In conclusion, PredWES allows prioritizing patients with NDDs eligible for diagnostic ES on the basis of their phenotypic presentation to increase the diagnostic yield, making a more efficient use of health care resources.
34906480|a|PURPOSE: Recurrent pathogenic copy number variants (pCNVs) have large-effect impacts on brain function and represent important etiologies of neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders (NPDs), including autism and schizophrenia. Patterns of health care utilization in adults with pCNVs have gone largely unstudied and are likely to differ in significant ways from those of children. METHODS: We compared the prevalence of NPDs and electronic health record-based medical conditions in 928 adults with 26 pCNVs to a demographically-matched cohort of pCNV-negative controls from >135,000 patient-participants in Geisinger's MyCode Community Health Initiative. We also evaluated 3 quantitative health care utilization measures (outpatient, inpatient, and emergency department visits) in both groups. RESULTS: Adults with pCNVs (24.9%) were more likely than controls (16.0%) to have a documented NPD. They had significantly higher rates of several chronic diseases, including diabetes (29.3% in participants with pCNVs vs 20.4% in participants without pCNVs) and dementia (2.2% in participants with pCNVs vs 1.0% participants without pCNVs), and twice as many annual emergency department visits. CONCLUSION: These findings highlight the potential for genetic information-specifically, pCNVs-to inform the study of health care outcomes and utilization in adults. If, as our findings suggest, adults with pCNVs have poorer health and require disproportionate health care resources, early genetic diagnosis paired with patient-centered interventions may help to anticipate problems, improve outcomes, and reduce the associated economic burden.
34906264|a|
34906008|a|Autistic adults have higher health needs compared to most, yet they continue to experience barriers to accessing appropriate healthcare. Presently, no qualitative research exists exploring these barriers which impact overall physical and mental health. We conducted a qualitative analysis in Victoria (Australia) of the perceived experiences of healthcare access for autistic adults (n = 9) and primary caregivers of autistic adults (n = 7). Specifically, a three-staged phenomenological approach was applied involving: (i) a communicative checklist, (ii) a health status survey and (iii) face-to-face interviews. Elements such as support, responsibilities and protective factors exhibited by caregivers, may impact healthcare access for autistic adults. Results indicate the need for further research exploring interdependent factors that impact healthcare access by caregivers, so evidence-based interventions can be developed to support caregivers in the future.
34905721|a|OBJECTIVE: University and college counseling centers (UCCCs) are a front-line support for the mental health needs of autistic students, though little is known about clinician attitudes, comfort level, and training in autism. PARTICIPANTS: 89 UCCC clinicians were recruited via email listservs. METHODS: The authors developed a survey which assessed attitudes, comfort level, and training in autism. RESULTS: The majority of clinicians (82.0%, n = 73) had interacted with autistic students in the past year, and reported high levels of comfort with treating anxiety and depression. However, a smaller number reported confidence in their ability to diagnose autism. Training on autism emerged as an important deficit, as 31.5% of the clinicians denied receiving training either in their educational program or the UCCC. CONCLUSIONS: In this pilot study, clinicians reported a discrepancy between self-reported levels of comfort with autistic college students and past training, highlighting continuing education as an important area for future intervention.
34905472|a|INTRODUCTION: Although there is a lot of scientific evidence that the benefits of vaccines outweigh their risks, hesitancy about the safety of vaccines can occur in every segment of the community. In this study, we aimed to determine the knowledge, attitudes, and associated factors of vaccine hesitancy among Inonu University faculty members regarding childhood vaccinations. METHOD: This is a cross-sectional study, and 258 faculty members were included in the study. The questionnaire used in the study explored the sociodemographic characteristics of the faculty members and their knowledge, attitudes and behaviors regarding childhood vaccination. A chi-square test and a fisher exact test were used for statistical analysis. RESULTS: Of the faculty members, 31.8% were hesitant about childhood vaccines, 51.9% stated that there were studies reporting the side effects of vaccines, 48.1% did not agree with giving booster doses of vaccines, 35.7% stated that vaccines could cause autism due to the chemicals contained in the vaccines. The most important information sources of university faculty regarding childhood vaccines members are scientific publications and health professionals. CONCLUSIONS: Faculty members level of hesitancy about vaccines was high and since health professionals and scientific articles are the most important information sources of faculty members, misinformation here may affect their knowledge, attitudes and behaviors about vaccination.
34905409|a|Objectives: Maternal 15q11-13 duplication syndrome (dup15q) is one of the most frequently observed and penetrant genetic abnormalities associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and commonly presents with psychiatric symptoms and seizures. Although carbamazepine has been reported as effective in managing comorbid seizures in dup15q, it has not been reported to be used as a mood stabilizer in this population. Methods: We retrospectively reviewed the charts of five consecutive patients presenting with previously diagnosed dup15q and ASD seeking treatment for psychiatric symptoms and, in four of the patients, seizures. These were the only patients with dup15q treated with carbamazepine in the Neurodevelopmental Psychopharmacology Clinic at the University of Illinois at Chicago during the review period. Results: During treatment, carbamazepine was found to be more effective than other mood stabilizers in all five patients, and in one case a better antiepileptic. Symptoms consistent with bipolar mood disorder such as hyperactivity, impulsivity, irritability, mood lability, intrusiveness, and pressured speech were improved with carbamazepine in combination with other psychotropic medications. This improvement was greater than with other mood stabilizers, including oxcarbazepine, valproate, and lamotrigine. In one case, valproate paradoxically worsened symptoms. In three cases, anxiety was improved with carbamazepine when used in conjunction with other medications targeting anxiety. Conclusions: In treating five patients with dup15q, carbamazepine more effectively stabilized mood-related symptoms than alternative treatments. Prospective randomized controlled trials are necessary to confirm this observation.
34905293|a|Organisms filter the complexity of natural stimuli through their individual sensory and perceptual systems. Such perceptual filtering is particularly important for social stimuli. A shared "social umwelt" allows individuals to respond appropriately to the expected diversity of cues and signals during social interactions. In this way, the behavioral and neurobiological mechanisms of sociality and social bonding cannot be disentangled from perceptual mechanisms and sensory processing. While a degree of embeddedness between social and sensory processes is clear, our dominant theoretical frameworks favor treating the social and sensory processes as distinct. An integrated social-sensory framework has the potential to greatly expand our understanding of the mechanisms underlying individual variation in social bonding and sociality more broadly. Here we leverage what is known about sensory processing and pair bonding in two common study systems with significant species differences in their umwelt (rodent chemosensation and avian acoustic communication). We primarily highlight that (1) communication is essential for pair bond formation and maintenance, (2) the neural circuits underlying perception, communication and social bonding are integrated, and (3) candidate neuromodulatory mechanisms that regulate pair bonding also impact communication and perception. Finally, we propose approaches and frameworks that more fully integrate sensory processing, communication, and social bonding across levels of analysis: behavioral, neurobiological, and genomic. This perspective raises two key questions: (1) how is social bonding shaped by differences in sensory processing?, and (2) to what extent is sensory processing and the saliency of signals shaped by social interactions and emerging relationships?
34904221|a|Transcriptor co-activator factor 20 gene (TCF20) encodes a nuclear chromatin-binding protein involved in regulation of gene expression. In human pathology, pathogenic variants or deletions in TCF20 were identified in patients with developmental delay, variable intellectual disability and behavioral impairment (OMIM: 618430). The shared core phenotype includes developmental delay, hypotonia, motor delay, autism spectrum disorders, neurobehavioral anomalies, neurological features such as ataxia, seizures, movement disorders, structural brain anomalies, craniofacial features and various congenital anomalies. Most pathogenic variants are loss-of-function variants. Duplication including TCF20 was suspected to cause a neurodevelopmental disorder with mirror traits compared to patients with TCF20 deletions. In the present study, we report three patients from three unrelated families with neurodevelopmental disorder with a de novo duplication at 22q13.2 encompassing TCF20. We propose that the TCF20 duplication could be involved in a new 22q13.2 microduplication syndrome with high penetrance, enlarging the genotype-phenotype knowledge of TCF20-associated neurodevelopmental disorders.
34903869|a|
34903784|a|Exposure to infection in utero predisposes towards psychiatric diseases such as autism, depression and schizophrenia in later life. The mechanisms involved are typically studied by administering mimetics of double-stranded (ds) virus or bacterial infection to pregnant rats or mice. The effect of single-stranded (ss) virus mimetics has been largely ignored, despite evidence linking prenatal ss virus exposure with psychiatric disease. Understanding the effects of gestational ss virus exposure has become even more important with recent events. In this study, in pregnant mice, we compare directly the effects, on the maternal blood, placenta and the embryonic brain, of maternal administration of ds-virus mimetic poly I:C (to activate Toll-like receptor 3, TLR3) and ss-virus mimetic resiquimod (to activate TLR7/8). We find that, 4 h after the administration, both poly I:C and resiquimod elevated the levels of IL-6, TNFalpha, and chemokines including CCL2 and CCL5, in maternal plasma. Both agents also increased placental mRNA levels of IL-6 and IL-10, but only resiquimod increased placental TNFalpha mRNA. In foetal brain, poly I:C produced no detectable immune-response-related increases, whereas pronounced increases in cytokine (e.g. Il-6, Tnfalpha) and chemokine (e.g. Ccl2, Ccl5) expression were observed with maternal resiquimod administration. The data show substantial differences between the effect of maternal exposure to a TLR7/8 activator as compared to a TLR3 activator. There are significant implications for future modelling of diseases where maternal ss virus exposure contributes to environmental disease risk in offspring.
34903665|a|Gene coexpression networks yield critical insights into biological processes, and single-cell RNA sequencing provides an opportunity to target inquiries at the cellular level. However, due to the sparsity and heterogeneity of transcript counts, it is challenging to construct accurate gene networks. We develop an approach, locCSN, that estimates cell-specific networks (CSNs) for each cell, preserving information about cellular heterogeneity that is lost with other approaches. LocCSN is based on a nonparametric investigation of the joint distribution of gene expression; hence it can readily detect nonlinear correlations, and it is more robust to distributional challenges. Although individual CSNs are estimated with considerable noise, average CSNs provide stable estimates of networks, which reveal gene communities better than traditional measures. Additionally, we propose downstream analysis methods using CSNs to utilize more fully the information contained within them. Repeated estimates of gene networks facilitate testing for differences in network structure between cell groups. Notably, with this approach, we can identify differential network genes, which typically do not differ in gene expression, but do differ in terms of the coexpression networks. These genes might help explain the etiology of disease. Finally, to further our understanding of autism spectrum disorder, we examine the evolution of gene networks in fetal brain cells and compare the CSNs of cells sampled from case and control subjects to reveal intriguing patterns in gene coexpression.
34903660|a|Extreme phenotype sequencing has led to the identification of high-impact rare genetic variants for many complex disorders but has not been applied to studies of severe schizophrenia. We sequenced 112 individuals with severe, extremely treatment-resistant schizophrenia, 218 individuals with typical schizophrenia, and 4,929 controls. We compared the burden of rare, damaging missense and loss-of-function variants between severe, extremely treatment-resistant schizophrenia, typical schizophrenia, and controls across mutation intolerant genes. Individuals with severe, extremely treatment-resistant schizophrenia had a high burden of rare loss-of-function (odds ratio, 1.91; 95% CI, 1.39 to 2.63; P = 7.8 x 10-5) and damaging missense variants in intolerant genes (odds ratio, 2.90; 95% CI, 2.02 to 4.15; P = 3.2 x 10-9). A total of 48.2% of individuals with severe, extremely treatment-resistant schizophrenia carried at least one rare, damaging missense or loss-of-function variant in intolerant genes compared to 29.8% of typical schizophrenia individuals (odds ratio, 2.18; 95% CI, 1.33 to 3.60; P = 1.6 x 10-3) and 25.4% of controls (odds ratio, 2.74; 95% CI, 1.85 to 4.06; P = 2.9 x 10-7). Restricting to genes previously associated with schizophrenia risk strengthened the enrichment with 8.9% of individuals with severe, extremely treatment-resistant schizophrenia carrying a damaging missense or loss-of-function variant compared to 2.3% of typical schizophrenia (odds ratio, 5.48; 95% CI, 1.52 to 19.74; P = 0.02) and 1.6% of controls (odds ratio, 5.82; 95% CI, 3.00 to 11.28; P = 2.6 x 10-8). These results demonstrate the power of extreme phenotype case selection in psychiatric genetics and an approach to augment schizophrenia gene discovery efforts.
34903576|a|
34903278|a|BACKGROUND: Autism is a developmental condition, where symptoms are expected to occur in childhood, but a significant number of individuals are diagnosed with autism for the first time in adulthood. Here, we examine diagnoses given in childhood among individuals that are diagnosed with autism in adulthood, to investigate whether the late autism diagnosis might be explained by misdiagnosis in childhood or diagnostic overshadowing. METHODS: Through the Danish National Patient Registry, we identified individuals diagnosed with autism in adulthood (N = 2199), as well as a control sample with no records of an autism diagnosis (N = 460,798) and calculated how many had received different psychiatric or neurological diagnoses in childhood. RESULTS: We found that most childhood diagnoses were overrepresented in those with an adult autism diagnosis, and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, affective disorders, anxiety, and stress disorders were the most prevalent childhood conditions in this group. However, 69% of males and 61% of females with adult autism diagnoses were not found to have received any of the investigated diagnoses before 18 years of age, and most childhood diagnoses were given after the age of 12. LIMITATIONS: Milder to moderate cases of psychiatric conditions that have been solely treated by family physicians or school psychologists may not be fully included in our dataset. The study is based on data from the Danish health care system, and further research is needed to assess whether the findings can be generalized to other countries. CONCLUSION: A majority of those with an adult autism diagnosis had no records of having received any of the investigated diagnoses in childhood. In these cases, the late autism diagnosis is therefore unlikely to be explained by either misdiagnosis or overshadowing. This result is at odds with the prevailing notion that autistic symptoms tend to diminish with age. Therefore, further research is warranted to examine how and if early signs of autism may have manifested among these individuals, and how similar they are to autistic people diagnosed earlier in their development.
34903083|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Emotion dysregulation (ED) impacts mental health symptoms and well-being in autistic individuals. In prior work, we developed the Emotion Awareness and Skills Enhancement (EASE) to improve emotion dysregulation with autistic adolescents (aged 12-17). The study team partnered with autistic individuals, their caregivers, and expert clinicians to adapt EASE for autistic adolescents and adults with co-occurring intellectual disability and autistic elementary-aged children, groups that often benefit from caregiver support in treatment. In three phases, we (1) gathered caregiver and expert feedback to adapt the original EASE program for autistic adults with intellectual disability, (2) revised the treatment after using it with six autistic adults with intellectual disability, and (3) tested the newly developed caregiver-client team-based treatment, called EASE-Teams, in a small group of 10 autistic individuals with and without intellectual disability (aged 7-25). Families found EASE-Teams to be acceptable and helpful. We found improvements in emotion dysregulation and mental health symptoms for autistic participants. Caregivers reported less stress from their child's dysregulation after participating. These results show that EASE-Teams can be appropriate for different developmental and cognitive needs. Future studies will need to test the benefits of the treatment in community clinics.
34903078|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Gastrointestinal problems are common in the autism spectrum disorder community and may affect both the person with autism spectrum disorder and their families. However, little research is available on the experiences of families who have a child with both autism spectrum disorder and gastrointestinal symptoms. We held one-on-one interviews with 12 parents of children who had both autism spectrum disorder and gastrointestinal symptoms. We analyzed the raw text responses from these interviews and identified four main themes. First, parents shared that their children had trouble verbally communicating when they were experiencing gastrointestinal symptoms (Theme 1). This led parents to use bodily signs, such as changes in the stool, and non-verbal behaviors, such as irritability, to recognize when their child was having gastrointestinal symptoms. Next, gastrointestinal issues affected both the child's well-being and their ability to attend class and extracurricular or social activities (Theme 2). The gastrointestinal issues also affected the family's routines, overall well-being, and their ability to go out and do activities together as a family (Theme 3). Finally, parents often had challenges receiving accessible and quality healthcare for their child's gastrointestinal problems (Theme 4). Together, these findings highlight the enormous burden that gastrointestinal symptoms have on the wellness of children with autism spectrum disorder and their families.
34903076|a|LAY ABSTRACT: During the first year of life, infants start to align their attention with that of other people. This ability is called joint attention and facilitates social learning and language development. Although children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are known to engage less in joint attention compared to other children, several experimental studies have shown that they follow other's gaze (a requirement for visual joint attention) to the same extent as other children. In this study, infants' eye movements were measured at age 10, 14, and 18 months while watching another person look in a certain direction. A target object was either present or absent in the direction of the other person's gaze. Some of the infants were at elevated likelihood of ASD, due to having an older autistic sibling. At age 3 years, infants were assessed for a diagnosis of ASD. Results showed that infants who met diagnostic criteria at 3 years followed gaze to the same extent as other infants. However, they then looked back at the model faster than typically developing infants when no target object was present. When a target object was present, there was no difference between groups. These results may be in line with the view that directly after gaze following, infants with later ASD are less influenced by other people's gaze when processing the common attentional focus. The study adds to our understanding of both the similarities and differences in looking behaviors between infants who later receive an ASD diagnosis and other infants.
34902289|a|PURPOSE: Although there is a strong evidence base supporting the use of augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) in school settings, the research-to-practice gap in this area remains a concern. Few studies have examined how AAC systems are implemented in school settings and whether these systems adequately promote communicative competence for students with complex communication needs. The aim of this case study was to better understand the ways in which elementary-age students with complex communication needs used AAC throughout daily routines. METHOD: Observations of five students, four receiving services under the category of autism and one under intellectual disability, in school settings were conducted to document the communication function, type of AAC systems used, and the times and activities during which AAC systems were accessible. In addition, supplemental interviews were conducted to understand the rationale for AAC implementation from the perspective of the special education teacher and speech-language pathologist. RESULTS: Overall, findings from the observations and interviews indicated that a variety of AAC modes were utilized. Interactions represented a range of communicative functions, with the exception of social closeness, and were primarily observed during academic activities. However, there were some discrepancies between observations and interview data. CONCLUSIONS: Although these findings provide insight into how students with complex communication needs may use AAC in elementary school settings, more research is needed to explore AAC use across a range of students, classrooms, and schools. We present specific future research directions, along with implications and recommendations for AAC teams and researchers.
34901794|a|Background: Data on psychiatric disorders in survivors born very preterm (VP; <32 weeks) or very low birthweight (VLBW; <1500 g) are sparse. We compared rates of psychiatric diagnoses between VP/VLBW and term-born, normal birthweight (term/NBW) control participants. Methods: This individual participant data (IPD) meta-analysis pooled data from eligible groups in the Adults born Preterm International Collaboration (APIC). Inclusion criteria included: 1) VP/VLBW group (birth weight <1500 g and/or gestational age <32 weeks), 2) normal birth weight/term-born control group (birth weight >2499 g and/or gestational age >=37 weeks), and 3) structured measure of psychiatric diagnoses using DSM or ICD criteria. Diagnoses of interest were Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), Anxiety Disorder, Mood Disorder, Disruptive Behaviour Disorder (DBD), Eating Disorder, and Psychotic Disorder. A systematic search for eligible studies was conducted (PROSPERO Registration Number 47555). Findings: Data were obtained from 10 studies (1385 VP/VLBW participants, 1780 controls), using a range of instruments and approaches to assigning diagnoses. Those born VP/VLBW had ten times higher odds of meeting criteria for ASD (odds ratio [OR] 10 6, 95% confidence interval [CI] 2 50, 44 7), five times higher odds of meeting criteria for ADHD (OR 5 42, 95% CI 3 10, 9 46), twice the odds of meeting criteria for Anxiety Disorder (OR 1 91, 95% CI 1 36, 2 69), and 1 5 times the odds of meeting criteria for Mood Disorder (OR 1 51, 95% CI 1 08, 2 12) than controls. This pattern of findings was consistent within age (<18 years vs. >=18 years) and sex subgroups. Interpretation: Our data suggests that individuals born VP/VLBW might have higher odds of meeting criteria for certain psychiatric disorders through childhood and into adulthood than term/NBW controls. Further research is needed to corroborate our results and identify factors associated with psychiatric disorders in individuals born VP/VLBW. Funding: Australia's National Health & Medical Research Council; CAPES (Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal deNivel Superior) - International Cooperation General Program; Canadian Institutes of Health Research Team Grant; National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq); Academy of Finland; Sigrid Juselius Foundation; Signe and Ane Gyllenberg Foundation; European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme: Project RECAP-Preterm; European Commission Dynamics of Inequality Across the Life-course: structures and processes (DIAL); Neurologic Foundation of New Zealand; MRC programme grant; Health Research Council of New Zealand; National Institutes of Health, USA; The Research Council of Norway; Joint Research Committee between St. Olavs Hospital and Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU); Liaison Committee between Central Norway Regional Health Authority and NTNU.
34901706|a|The assumption that chronic mechanical stress in brain cells stemming from intracranial hypertension, arterial hypertension, or mechanical injury is a risk factor for neurodegenerative diseases was put forward in the 1990s and has since been supported. However, the molecular mechanisms that underlie the way from cell exposure to mechanical stress to disturbances in synaptic plasticity followed by changes in behavior, cognition, and memory are still poorly understood. Here we review (1) the current knowledge of molecular mechanisms regulating local translation and the actin cytoskeleton state at an activated synapse, where they play a key role in the formation of various sorts of synaptic plasticity and long-term memory, and (2) possible pathways of mechanical stress intervention. The roles of the mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) signaling pathway; the RNA-binding FMRP protein; the CYFIP1 protein, interacting with FMRP; the family of small GTPases; and the WAVE regulatory complex in the regulation of translation initiation and actin cytoskeleton rearrangements in dendritic spines of the activated synapse are discussed. Evidence is provided that chronic mechanical stress may result in aberrant activation of mTOR signaling and the WAVE regulatory complex via the YAP/TAZ system, the key sensor of mechanical signals, and influence the associated pathways regulating the formation of F actin filaments and the dendritic spine structure. These consequences may be a risk factor for various neurological conditions, including autistic spectrum disorders and epileptic encephalopathy. In further consideration of the role of the local translation system in the development of neuropsychic and neurodegenerative diseases, an original hypothesis was put forward that one of the possible causes of synaptopathies is impaired proteome stability associated with mTOR hyperactivity and formation of complex dynamic modes of de novo protein synthesis in response to synapse-stimulating factors, including chronic mechanical stress.
34900593|a|Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an inborn error of metabolism caused by variants in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene and it is characterized by excessively high levels of phenylalanine in body fluids. PKU is a paradigm for a genetic disease that can be treated and majority of developed countries have a population-based newborn screening. Thus, the combination of early diagnosis and immediate initiation of treatment has resulted in normal intelligence for treated PKU patients. Although PKU is a monogenic disease, decades of research and clinical practice have shown that the correlation between the genotype and corresponding phenotype is not simple at all. Attempts have been made to discover modifier genes for PKU cognitive phenotype but without any success so far. We conducted whole genome sequencing of 4 subjects from unrelated non-consanguineous families who presented with pathogenic mutations in the PAH gene, high blood phenylalanine concentrations and near-normal cognitive development despite no treatment. We used cross sample analysis to select genes common for more than one patient. Thus, the SHANK gene family emerged as the only relevant gene family with variants detected in 3 of 4 analyzed patients. We detected two novel variants, p.Pro1591Ala in SHANK1 and p.Asp18Asn in SHANK2, as well as SHANK2:p.Gly46Ser, SHANK2:p.Pro1388_Phe1389insLeuPro and SHANK3:p.Pro1716Thr variants that were previously described. Computational analysis indicated that the identified variants do not abolish the function of SHANK proteins. However, changes in posttranslational modifications of SHANK proteins could influence functioning of the glutamatergic synapses, cytoskeleton regulation and contribute to maintaining optimal synaptic density and number of dendritic spines. Our findings are linking SHANK gene family and brain plasticity in PKU for the first time. We hypothesize that variant SHANK proteins maintain optimal synaptic density and number of dendritic spines under high concentrations of phenylalanine and could have protective modifying effect on cognitive development of PKU patients.
34900317|a|Introduction: Early diagnosis of autism is a critical step for gaining early intervention. The earlier interventions begin, the greater chance to reduce symptoms of autism over the lifespan. Despite the improvement in early diagnosis, age at diagnosis varies by residential locations. In order to improve early screening services, this study aims to identify geographic clusters of early and late diagnosis of autism, in addition, it is aimed to compare cases inside the clusters with the rest of the province on characteristics and socioeconomic factors. Materials and methods: Survey data were collected from 163 autistics born from 1996 to 2011 in Isfahan Province, Iran. As this study found diagnosis of autism occur at an earlier age among children, who on average every 2.5 months increased for each year of age, distance from regression line has been used to determine how early a case was diagnosed compared to other identified cases. After dividing cases into 5 classes based on their distances from the regression line, the ordinal based space-time scan statistic in SaTScan was used to identify geographic areas within specific time periods that have significantly elevated proportions of autistic children who received diagnosis at the earlier or later stages. Results: The space-time analysis identified two geographic areas that age of diagnosis was inconsistent with the overall study area, the first area has an early diagnosis in central part of Isfahan megacity between 1998 and 2006 (P = .001), the second area shows to have a late diagnosis centered by Najafabad from 2010 through 2015 (P = .007). Conclusions: The result of our spatial analysis can be used to evaluate the performance of diagnosis services and additionally provide information to target specific at-risk population for further interventions.
34899984|a|Many individuals on the autism spectrum are hypersensitive to certain sensory stimuli. For this group, as well as for non-autistic individuals with sensory processing disorders, being exposed to e.g. fluorescent lights, perfume odours, and various sounds and noises can be real torment. In this article, I consider the normative implications of such offence for the design of office spaces, which is a topic that has not received any attention from philosophers. After identifying different ways in which the senses of hypersensitive workers might be protected within these spaces, I show that many of such accommodations can be made at reasonable cost, before arguing that doing so ought to be a legal requirement.
34899870|a|Introduction: Neurodevelopmental disorders with language impairment and behavioral abnormalities (NEDLIB) are a disease caused by heterozygous variants in the glutamate ionotropic receptor AMPA type subunit 2 (GRIA2) gene, which manifest as impaired mental development or developmental delay, behavioral abnormalities including autistic characteristics, and language disorders. Currently, only a few mutations in the GRIA2 gene have been discovered. Methods: A GRIA2 variation was detected in a patient by whole-exome sequencing, and the site was validated by Sanger sequencing from the family. Results: We report a Chinese case of NEDLIB in a girl with language impairment and developmental delay through whole-exome sequencing (WES). Genetic analysis showed that there was a de novo missense mutation, c.1934T > G (p.Leu645Arg), in the GRIA2 gene (NM_001083619.1), which has never been reported before. Conclusion: Our case shows the potential diagnostic role of WES in NEDLIB, expands the GRIA2 gene mutation spectrum, and further deepens the understanding of NEDLIB. Deepening the study of the genetic and clinical heterogeneity, treatment, and prognosis of the disease is still our future challenge and focus.
34899431|a|Mental disorders are heterogeneous and psychiatric comorbidities are common. Previous studies have suggested a link between inflammation and mental disorders. This link can manifest as increased levels of proinflammatory mediators in circulation and as signs of neuroinflammation. Furthermore, there is strong evidence that individuals suffering from psychiatric disorders have increased risk of developing metabolic comorbidities. Our group has previously shown that, in a cohort of low-functioning individuals with serious mental disorders, there is increased expression of genes associated with the NLRP3 inflammasome, a known sensor of metabolic perturbations, as well as increased levels of IL-1-family cytokines. In the current study, we set out to explore the interplay between disease-specific changes in lipid metabolism and known markers of inflammation. To this end, we performed mass spectrometry-based lipidomic analysis of plasma samples from low-functioning individuals with serious mental disorders (n = 39) and matched healthy controls (n = 39). By identifying non-spurious immune-lipid associations, we derived a partial correlation network of inflammatory markers and molecular lipids. We identified levels of lipids as being altered between individuals with serious mental disorders and controls, showing associations between lipids and inflammatory mediators, e.g., osteopontin and IL-1 receptor antagonist. These results indicate that, in low-functioning individuals with serious mental disorders, changes in specific lipids associate with immune mediators that are known to affect neuroinflammatory diseases.
34899423|a|Suppressed heart rate variability (HRV) has been found in a number of psychiatric conditions, including schizophrenia and autism. HRV is a potential biomarker of altered autonomic functioning that can predict future physiological and cognitive health. Understanding the HRV profiles that are unique to each condition will assist in generating predictive models of health. In the current study, we directly compared 12 adults with schizophrenia, 25 adults with autism, and 27 neurotypical controls on their HRV profiles. HRV was measured using an electrocardiogram (ECG) channel as part of a larger electroencephalography (EEG) study. All participants also completed the UCLA Loneliness Questionnaire as a measure of social stress. We found that the adults with schizophrenia exhibited reduced variability in R-R peaks and lower low frequency power in the ECG trace compared to controls. The HRV in adults with autism was slightly suppressed compared to controls but not significantly so. Interestingly, the autism group reported feeling lonelier than the schizophrenia group, and HRV did not correlate with feelings of loneliness for any of the three groups. However, suppressed HRV was related to worse performance on neuropsychological tests of cognition in the schizophrenia group. Together, this suggests that autonomic functioning is more abnormal in schizophrenia than in autism and could be reflecting health factors that are unique to schizophrenia.
34899415|a|The challenges of caring for children with complex health needs, such as intellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), are multiple and experienced by both caregivers and health professionals. Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common single gene cause of ID and ASD, and provides a pertinent model to understand these complexities of care, as well as the communication challenges experienced between caregivers and healthcare professionals. In recent years both caregivers and healthcare professionals have recognized the need for enhancing communication both in clinical and research settings. Knowledge mapping has emerged as a tool to support quality communication between team participants. Here we review how differences in mental models, as well as challenges related to health literacy and knowledge transfer can have an impact on communication. Next, we present different knowledge mapping approaches used in complex situations, with a focus on concept maps and care maps. Finally, we highlight the potential benefits and limitations of mapping to improve communication issues related to caring for individuals with FXS and potentially other neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs).
34899412|a|Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the leading known genetic cause of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) with 60-74% of males with FXS meeting diagnostic criteria for ASD. Infants with FXS have demonstrated atypical neural responses during face processing that are unique from both typically developing, low-risk infants and infants at high familial risk for ASD (i.e., infants siblings of children with ASD). In the current study, event-related potential (ERP) responses during face processing measured at 12 months of age were examined in relation to ASD symptoms measured at ~48 months of age in participants with FXS, as well as siblings of children with ASD and low-risk control participants. Results revealed that greater amplitude N290 responses in infancy were associated with more severe ASD symptoms in childhood in FXS and in siblings of children with ASD. This pattern of results was not observed for low-risk control participants. Reduced Nc amplitude was associated with more severe ASD symptoms in participants with FXS but was not observed in the other groups. This is the first study to examine ASD symptoms in childhood in relation to infant ERP responses in FXS. Results indicate that infant ERP responses may be predictive of later symptoms of ASD in FXS and the presence of both common and unique pathways to ASD in etiologically-distinct high-risk groups is supported (i.e., syndromic risk vs. familial risk).
34899411|a|Although previous research supports the notion that characteristics of both the child and the mother impact maternal well-being and parenting stress in mothers of children with FXS, more work is needed in which self-report measures are supplemented by physiological measures of stress and well-being. The inclusion of physiological measures, such as heart rate variability (HRV), may provide a window into the biological origins and consequences of maternal perceptions of their experiences, including the challenges of raising a child with developmental challenges. The proposed project, therefore, involved the collection of multimodal assessment data from mothers and their school-aged children with FXS. Further, given the importance of understanding how mothers of youth with FXS are faring in their everyday environment, the present study collected all data using telehealth procedures and wearable technology. Participants were 20 biological mothers and their children with FXS between the ages of 6 and 11 years. We measured maternal mental health and parenting stress through self-report as well as through HRV as a more objective measure of psychological well-being. We also examined the associations between these variables and child characteristics such as externalizing and internalizing behaviors as well as autism symptomatology. We found significant support for an elevated rate of depressive symptoms in the sample of mothers (35%) and some potential indicators for heightened rates of anxiety (15%) when compared to normed samples and rates in the general population. We also found that the mothers presented with an atypical HRV profile akin to those experiencing depression or chronic stress, although limitations of the present measure suggest the need for additional confirmatory research. Further, we found that child externalizing behaviors were the primary correlates of maternal well-being. These findings contribute to the growing body of literature regarding the unique challenges faced by these mother-child dyads and supports the importance of increasing the availability of services available to these mothers, not only for meeting the needs of their children's development and behavior, but in supporting their own well-being as well.
34899407|a|The study aimed to investigate the economic costs in families of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and explored how the time interval from diagnosis to treatment time interval from the date children first diagnosed with ASD to the date of first speech/behavior treatment influenced the economic costs. It was a cross-sectional study that recruited families with autistic children in Changsha, Hunan Province of China during March to November 2018. A self-designed questionnaire was applied to collect ASD-related economic costs in the two vital periods including the 12-month period after diagnosis and the most recent 12 months during the course of ASD. In total, 136 families with autistic children completed the interview. The results showed that 46.3% of children started intervention within 1 month. The median of total economic costs of these families in the 12-month period after diagnosis and the most recent 12 months was 26,502.26 RMB and 29,411.91 RMB, respectively. Compared with the time interval shorter than 1 month, time interval over 6 months was significantly associated with high direct economic costs (beta SD = 0.308, 95% CI = 0.177, 1.254), inpatient/outpatient and drugs costs (beta SD = 0.276, 95% CI = 0.104, 1.181), direct non-medical costs (beta SD = 0.287, 95% CI = 0.140, 1.206), and total economic burden (beta SD = 0.311, 95% CI = 0.186, 1.262); besides, time interval between 4 and 6 months was significantly related to large indirect costs (beta SD = 0.230, 95% CI = 0.098, 1.363) in the 12-month period after diagnosis. Similarly, time interval between 1 and 3 months was significantly associated with high direct non-medical costs (beta SD = 0.198, 95% CI = 0.004, 1.013) in the 12-month period after diagnosis. However, time interval from diagnosis to treatment was not correlated to economic costs in the recent 12 months. In the long term, shortening the time interval from diagnosis to treatment would reduce the economic burden on families, especially in the 12-month period after diagnosis.
34899403|a|Functional connectivity, quantified by phase synchrony, between brain regions is known to be aberrant in patients with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Here, we evaluated the long-range temporal correlations of time-varying phase synchrony (TV-PS) of electrocortical oscillations in patients with ASD as well as typically developing people using detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA) after validating the scale-invariance of the TV-PS time series. By comparing the DFA exponents between the two groups, we found that those of the TV-PS time series of high-gamma oscillations were significantly attenuated in patients with ASD. Furthermore, the regions involved in aberrant TV-PS time series were mainly within the social ability and cognition-related cortical networks. These results support the notion that abnormal social functions observed in patients with ASD may be caused by the highly volatile phase synchrony states of electrocortical oscillations.
34899183|a|Background: Pregnancy measures of DNA methylation, an epigenetic mark, may be associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) development in children. Few ASD studies have considered prospective designs with DNA methylation measured in multiple tissues and tested overlap with ASD genetic risk loci. Objectives: To estimate associations between DNA methylation in maternal blood, cord blood, and placenta and later diagnosis of ASD, and to evaluate enrichment of ASD-associated DNA methylation for known ASD-associated genes. Methods: In the Early Autism Risk Longitudinal Investigation (EARLI), an ASD-enriched risk birth cohort, genome-scale maternal blood (early n = 140 and late n = 75 pregnancy), infant cord blood (n = 133), and placenta (maternal n = 106 and fetal n = 107 compartments) DNA methylation was assessed on the Illumina 450k HumanMethylation array and compared to ASD diagnosis at 36 months of age. Differences in site-specific and global methylation were tested with ASD, as well as enrichment of single site associations for ASD risk genes (n = 881) from the Simons Foundation Autism Research Initiative (SFARI) database. Results: No individual DNA methylation site was associated with ASD at genome-wide significance, however, individual DNA methylation sites nominally associated with ASD (P < 0.05) in each tissue were highly enriched for SFARI genes (cord blood P = 7.9 x 10-29, maternal blood early pregnancy P = 6.1 x 10-27, maternal blood late pregnancy P = 2.8 x 10-16, maternal placenta P = 5.6 x 10-15, fetal placenta P = 1.3 x 10-20). DNA methylation sites nominally associated with ASD across all five tissues overlapped at 144 (29.5%) SFARI genes. Conclusion: DNA methylation sites nominally associated with later ASD diagnosis in multiple tissues were enriched for ASD risk genes. Our multi-tissue study demonstrates the utility of examining DNA methylation prior to ASD diagnosis.
34899182|a|SHANK2 (ProSAP1) is a postsynaptic scaffolding protein of excitatory synapses in the central nervous system and implicated in the development of autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Patients with mutations in SHANK2 show autism-like behaviors, developmental delay, and intellectual disability. We generated human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSC) from a patient carrying a heterozygous deletion of SHANK2 and from the unaffected parents. In patient hiPSCs and derived neurons SHANK2 mRNA and protein expression was reduced. During neuronal maturation, a reduction in growth cone size and a transient increase in neuronal soma size were observed. Neuronal proliferation was increased, and apoptosis was decreased in young and mature neurons. Additionally, mature patient hiPSC-derived neurons showed dysregulated excitatory signaling and a decrease of a broad range of signaling molecules of the ERK-MAP kinase pathway. These findings could be confirmed in brain samples from Shank2(-/-) mice, which also showed decreased mGluR5 and phospho-ERK1/2 expression. Our study broadens the current knowledge of SHANK2-related ASD. We highlight the importance of excitatory-inhibitory balance and mGluR5 dysregulation with disturbed downstream ERK1/2 signaling in ASD, which provides possible future therapeutic strategies for SHANK2-related ASD.
34899164|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by deficits in social interactions and repetitive, stereotypic behaviors. Evidence shows that bidirectional communication of the gut-brain axis plays an important role. Here, we recruited 62 patients with ASD in southern China, and performed a cross-sectional study to test the relationship between repeated behavior, gut microbiome composition, and alpha diversity. We divided all participants into two groups based on the clustering results of their microbial compositions and found Veillonella and Ruminococcus as the seed genera in each group. Repetitive behavior differed between clusters, and cluster 2 had milder repetitive symptoms than Cluster 1. Alpha diversity between clusters was significantly different, indicating that cluster 1 had lower alpha diversity and more severe repetitive, stereotypic behaviors. Repetitive behavior had a negative correlation with alpha diversity. We demonstrated that the difference in intestinal microbiome composition and altered alpha diversity can be associated with repetitive, stereotypic behavior in autism. The role of Ruminococcus and Veillonella in ASD is not yet understood.
34899160|a|Background: The aim of our study was to compare adaptive skills, emotional/behavioral problems, and parental stress among children with different severity levels of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) symptoms. Methods: This study included a sample of 88 subjects with ASD (mean age = 6.00 +- 2.70). All subjects underwent standardized neuropsychological tests for the assessment of symptoms of the autism spectrum (Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule-Second Edition), adaptive level (The Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales, Survey Interview, 2nd edition), behavioral and emotional problems (Child Behavior CheckList CBCL), and parental stress (Parental Stress Index Short Form-PSI-SF). Non-parametric statistical methods (Kruskal-Wallis test and Mann-Whitney U-test for post hoc analysis) and linear regression analysis were used in this study. Results: Children who had higher severity levels of ASD symptoms had less adaptive functioning; younger children showed more severe symptoms of ASD; older children had better communication skills. The presence of greater adaptive difficulties was related to a greater presence of internalizing problems. An increase in parental stress levels was related to an higher severity of ASD symptoms, fewer adaptive skills, and a greater presence of internalizing and externalizing problems. Conclusion: This study suggests that the adaptive behavior should be considered in order to planning a habilitation intervention in children with autism. It is also important to monitor emotional/behavioral problems and parental stress levels in order to provide parenting support and improve the family quality of life.
34898983|a|This comprehensive thematic review aims to highlight and familiarize readers with the challenges and pitfalls encountered in differential diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) in children to facilitate the process of accurate identification by stakeholders. Accordingly, articles that best answer our questions and highlight our concerns were chosen from well-established publishers with prime peer reviewed journals. Included are studies showing alternate views of the issues so as to point readers to other possibilities. ASD, a complex dynamic biological-neurodevelopmental disorder, is underscored by its heterogeneous symptomology, severity, and phenotypes - all characterized by social communication deficits and presence of restricted interests and repetitive behaviours (RRBs), the core symptoms in ASD. Language and intellectual capacities do not form ASD core symptoms although vary considerably. Accurate identification is challenging as ASD is often enmeshed with other neurodevelopmental disorders, and medical comorbidities, a situation now recognized as the rule rather than the exception in child psychiatry and developmental medicine. ASD is a disorder with varying performance and severity of symptoms over time, including unexpected loss of early skills, and lost diagnosis in some children following treatment. The review reiterates the urgency in accurate diagnosis in face of the rapid rise in ASD prevalence globally, and risk-increase in delayed or denied treatment with undesirable life-long consequences for most of the affected children. In addition, a call for change is advised to circumvent the ethical dilemma posed by the present "deficit model" in ASD diagnosis. Here, ASD prevalence is presented first, followed by emphasis on importance of accurate early diagnosis, and challenges in its accomplishment due to flaws in diagnostic instruments and other contributing factors. Next follow the required criteria for accurate identification, and its difficulties attributed to comorbid conditions, gender differences, and socio-economic and cultural influences. The conclusion includes future directions and a take away message.
34898614|a|Sub-threshold autistic traits are common in the general population. Children with sub-threshold autistic traits have difficulties with social adaptation. Contactin-associated protein-like 2 (CNTNAP2) is associated with the development of Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and the single-nucleotide polymorphism rs2710102 (G/A) of CNTNAP2 is suggested to contribute to sub-threshold social impairments and intellectual disabilities. We recruited 67 children with Autistic disorder (AD) (49 boys, 18 girls, aged 38-98 months) and 57 typically developing (TD) children (34 boys, 23 girls, aged 53-90 months). We assessed the participants' intelligence and social reciprocity using the Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children (K-ABC) and the Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS), respectively. Genomic DNA was extracted from the buccal mucosa and genotyped for rs2710102. A chi-square test revealed a significant association between genotype and group [chi2(2) = 6.56, p = 0.038]. When a co-dominant model was assumed, the results from linear regression models demonstrated that TD children with A-carriers (AA + AG) presented higher SRS T-scores [t(55) = 2.11, p = 0.039] and lower simultaneous processing scale scores of K-ABC [t(55) = -2.19, p = 0.032] than those with GG homozygotes. These associations were not significant in children with ASD. TD children with the rs2710102 A-allele may have more sub-threshold autistic traits than those with GG homozygotes, reflected in higher SRS scores and lower simultaneous processing scale scores. These results support the use of genetic evidence to detect sub-threshold autistic traits.
34898421|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) comprises a group of neurodevelopmental disorders with a high prevalence in childhood. The gut microbiota can affect human cognition and moods and has a strong correlation with ASD. Microbiota transplantation, including faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT), probiotics, breastfeeding, formula feeding, gluten-free and casein-free (GFCF) diet and ketogenic diet therapy, may provide satisfying effects for ASD and its related various symptoms. For instance, FMT can improve the core symptoms of ASD and gastrointestinal symptoms. Probiotics, breastfeeding and formula feeding, and GFCF diet can improve gastrointestinal symptoms. The core symptom score still needs to be confirmed by large-scale clinical randomized controlled studies. It is recommended to use a ketogenic diet to treat patients with epilepsy in ASD. At present, the unresolved problems include which of gut the microbiota are beneficial, which of the microorganisms are harmful, how to safely and effectively implant beneficial bacteria into the human body, and how to extract and eliminate harmful microorganisms before transplantation. In future studies, large sample and randomized controlled clinical studies are needed to confirm the mechanism of intestinal microorganisms in the treatment of ASD and the method of microbial transplantation.
34897764|a|BACKGROUND: Parental self-efficacy describes parents' self-perceived competence in fulfilling their roles. The Parenting Sense of Competence Scale (PSOC) is one of the most commonly used self-report instruments, allowing for parental self-efficacy measurement. METHODS: This paper summarizes the results of three studies (total N = 2,088) conducted to examine factor structure, internal consistency, test-retest reliability, and criterion validity of the Polish version of PSOC (PSOC-PL). The studies were carried out among parents (mothers and fathers) of typically developing fourteen- and fifteen-year-olds (Study 1, n = 1,404) as well as among parents of typically developing children aged 6 to 16 (Study 2, n = 248), parents of typically developing children and children with a diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder (Study 3, n = 436, ages ranged from 6 to 13). RESULTS: Confirmatory factor analysis (Study 1) demonstrated an acceptable fit of the theorized two-factor model, with theorized Satisfaction and Efficacy factors. The subscales' internal consistencies were satisfactory across all studies (Studies 1-3), and PSOC's test-retest reliability (Study 2) over a three-week interval was very high. Parents of children with developmental disorders (Study 3) reported lower efficacy than parents of typically developing children. CONCLUSIONS: The results of these three studies attest that the Polish version of PSOC is a reliable and valid measure of parental self-efficacy beliefs.
34897755|a|AIMS: This study aimed to report the perception of parents of children/adolescents with autism regarding the parents' fear of the pandemic by COVID-19. Also, to report children's fear about the use of individual protective equipment (IPE) in dental appointments, and the impact on the daily routine during the pandemic. METHODS AND RESULTS: A cross-sectional study through an open online survey was addressed to parents of children/adolescents autistic, aged between 3 and 18 years. The questionnaire had questions regarding the parents' fear of the COVID-19 pandemic, the parents' perception about the children/adolescents' fear of the use of IPEs at dental care, and the impact of the daily routine during the pandemic and social impact after the pandemic. Parents' reports on the degree of ASD (mild, moderate, and severe) of the child/adolescent. A total of 1001 responses were obtained. 50.35% of parents had high fear of the pandemic by COVID-19, 59.34% believe that children/teenagers will be afraid of the dentist's IPE and 61.64% responded that the COVID-19 pandemic had a high impact on the daily routine of children/adolescents with ASD. CONCLUSIONS: Most parents reported fear of the pandemic by COVID-19, that children/adolescents with autism may be afraid of IPE and had a high impact on their daily routine during the pandemic.
34897720|a|Community psychology (CP) is a transformative subdiscipline of psychology which aims to address inequality and social injustice and to attend to wellbeing. It has been argued that CP lacks an underpinning philosophy of science. Philosophies of science provide road maps for values, methods, and objectives, thus ultimately framing all research. This study will highlight how traditional philosophies of science such as positivism, interpretivism, and social constructivism fail to support the complexity of CP and often essentialise complex phenomena, such as autism, to the detriment of stakeholders. Critical realism will then be introduced as a promising philosophy of science for CP, which can reinvigorate CPs push for impactful research and social change. The study will highlight how CP provides a platform for appreciating the complexity of autism and for transforming structures of inequality experienced by autistic people, together with autistic people.
34897600|a|INTRODUCTION: Recreational scuba diving has existed for over 70 years with organisations emerging that teach individuals with disabilities to dive. It is unclear what the physical and psychosocial effects of scuba interventions might be. This systematic review explores evidence for the effects of scuba diving in individuals with neurological disability, intellectual disability and autism. METHODS: The databases Medline, EMBASE, Ovid Emcare, and SportDiscus were searched. Included papers described a scuba-based intervention for clients with a neurological disability, intellectual disability and autism, with physical or psychosocial outcomes explored in the paper. Quality of the included papers was assessed using the McMaster Appraisal Tools, with descriptive data synthesis completed to explore the physical and psychosocial effects of the interventions. RESULTS: Four papers met the inclusion criteria: a cross-sectional investigation, a phenomenological study, a case-control study and a multiple case study. The quality of the papers was low to moderate. Papers addressed the psychosocial effects of scuba diving, including motivation to participate, participant experiences, the effect on cognition and physical self-concept. One study reported an increase in self-concept for the majority of participants. An increase in understanding instructions and in visual attention was reported in another. Enjoyment of the activity was reported and motivators to be involved in scuba diving for people with disabilities included fun and excitement. No papers addressed functional outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: Whilst scuba diving interventions appear to enhance physical self-concept and are enjoyable, conclusive evidence regarding effectiveness could not be determined. Research in this area is extremely limited.
34897003|a|OBJECTIVE: The aim: Our work aims to investigate the therapeutic effect of art on children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) up to the age of 18 and to disseminate knowledge about its use as a part of therapy. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Materials and methods: The authors created an anonymous online questionnaire addressed to parents and legal guardians of children and adolescents with and without ASD. The studied population comprised 190 subjects, of which 108 were a control group (children and adolescents without ASD) and 82 - a study group (children and adolescents with ASD). RESULTS: Results: Most respondents did not hear about the therapeutic use of art (59.5%). 20.73% of respondents with ASD participated in therapy using artistic activities. 82.4% participated in music therapy, 23.5% - in theater therapy, and 70.6% - in art therapy. These forms of therapy effectively improved disorders related to social relationships, speech, and atypical behavior. CONCLUSION: Conclusions: There is a positive therapeutic effect of art on children and adolescents with ASD. The therapeutic use of art among the respondents is not very widespread. Artistic activities have a positive impact on social relations, speech, and unusual behavior. Music and visual arts activities seem to positively impact social relationship disorders, while theater activities seem to impact speech disorders positively. Combining several arts in therapy is more beneficial than using just one. Art therapy is most often used at the age of 13 and older.
34896742|a|Prenatal testosterone (pT) is a crucial component in physiological masculinization in humans. In line with the Prenatal Sex Steroid Theory of autism, some studies have found a positive correlation between pT and autistic traits in childhood. However, effects in adolescence have not been explored. Hormonal and environmental changes occurring during puberty may alter the strength or the nature of prenatal effects on autistic traits. The current study examines if pT relates to autistic traits in a non-clinical sample of adolescents and young adults (N = 97, 170 observations; age 13-21 years old). It also explores pT interactions with pubertal stage and timing. PT concentrations were measured from amniotic fluid extracted in the 2nd trimester of gestation via amniocentesis conducted for clinical purposes. Autistic traits were measured by self- and parent-reports on the Autism Spectrum Quotient (AQ) which provides a total score and 5 sub-scores (social skills, communication, imagination, attention switching and attention to detail). Self-reported pubertal stage was regressed on age to provide a measure of relative timing. We found no statistical evidence for a direct association between pT and autistic traits in this adolescent sample (males, females or full sample). Exploratory analyses suggested that pT correlated positively with autistic traits in adolescents with earlier puberty-onset, but statistical robustness of this finding was limited. Further exploratory post-hoc tests suggested the pT-by-pubertal timing interaction was stronger in males relative to females, in self-reported compared to parent-reported AQ and specifically for social traits. These findings require replication in larger samples. Findings have implications for understanding the effects of pT on human behavior, specifically existence of effects in adolescence.
34896416|a|Environmental factors have been associated with the etiology of autism spectrum disorder ASD in recent times. The involvement of toxic metals in the generation of reactive oxygen species and their epigenetics effects have been implicated in ASD. This systemic review examines the association of toxic metals with autism in children. A systematic literature search was performed in scientific databases such as PubMed, Google scholar, and Scopus. Case-control studies evaluating toxic metal levels in different tissues of ASD children and comparing them to healthy children (control group) were identified. The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale was used to evaluate the risk of bias of the included studies. Six case-control studies with 425 study subjects met our inclusion criteria. A total of four studies indicated higher levels of As, Pb, Hg, Cd, Al, Sn, Sb, Ba, TI, W, and Zr in whole blood, RBC, in whole blood, RBC, and hair samples of children with autism compared with control suggestive of a greater toxic metal exposure (immediate and long-term). Three studies identified significantly higher concentrations of Cd, Pb and Hg in urine and hair samples of autistic children compared to control suggesting decreased excretion and possible high body burden of these metals. The findings from this review demonstrate that high levels of toxic metals are associated with ASD, therefore, critical care is necessary to reduce body burden of these metals in children with ASD as a major therapeutic strategy.
34896197|a|Deficits in social communication and interaction are core clinical symptoms characterizing multiple neuropsychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and schizophrenia. Interestingly, elevated anxiety levels are a common comorbid psychopathology characterizing individuals with aberrant social behavior. Despite recent progress, the underlying neurobiological mechanisms that link anxiety with social withdrawal remain poorly understood. The present study developed a zebrafish pharmacological model displaying social withdrawal behavior, following a 3-h exposure to 4 muMu (+)-MK-801, a non-competitive N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist, for 7 days. Interestingly, MK-801-treated zebrafish displayed elevated anxiety levels along with higher frequency of stereotypical behaviors, rendering this zebrafish model appropriate to unravel a possible link of catecholaminergic and ASD-like phenotypes. MK-801-treated zebrafish showed increased telencephalic protein expression of metabotropic glutamate 5 receptor (mGluR5), dopamine transporter (DAT) and beta2-adrenergic receptors (beta2-ARs), supporting the presence of excitation/inhibition imbalance along with altered dopaminergic and noradrenergic activity. Interestingly, beta2-ARs expression, was differentially regulated across the Social Decision-Making (SDM) network nodes, exhibiting increased levels in ventral telencephalic area (Vv), a key-area integrating reward and social circuits but decreased expression in dorso-medial telencephalic area (Dm) and anterior tuberal nucleus (ATN). Moreover, the co-localization of beta2-ARs with elements of GABAergic and glutamatergic systems, as well as with GAP-43, a protein indicating increased brain plasticity potential, support the key-role of beta2-ARs in the MK-801 zebrafish social dysfunctions. Our results highlight the importance of the catecholaminergic neurotransmission in the manifestation of ASD-like behavior, representing a site of potential interventions for amelioration of ASD-like symptoms.
34896112|a|Fragile X Syndrome, as well as some manifestations of autism spectrum disorder, results from improper RNA regulation due to a deficiency of fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP). FMRP and its autosomal paralogs, fragile X related proteins 1 & 2 (FXR1P/2P), have been implicated in many aspects of RNA regulation, from protein synthesis to mRNA stability and decay. The literature on the fragile X related proteins' (FXPs) role in mRNA regulation and their potential mRNA targets is vast. Therefore, we developed an approach to investigate the function of FXPs in translational control using three potential mRNA targets. Briefly, we first selected top mRNA candidates found to be associated with the FXPs and whose translation are influenced by one or more of the FXPs. We then narrowed down the FXPs' binding site(s) within the mRNA, analyzed the strength of this binding in vitro, and determined how each FXP affects the translation of a minimal reporter mRNA with the binding site. Overall, all FXPs bound with high affinity to RNAs containing G-quadruplexes, such as Cyclin Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p21 and FMRP's own coding region. Interestingly, FMRP inhibited the translation of each mRNA distinctly and in a manner that appears to correlate with its binding to each mRNA. In contrast, FXR1P/2P inhibited all mRNAs tested. Finally, although binding of our RNAs was due to the RGG (arginine-glycine-glycine) motif-containing C-terminal region of the FXPs, this region was not sufficient to cause inhibition of translation.
34896003|a|Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency (SSADHD) is an inherited inborn error of the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) metabolism pathway. It results from mutations in the ALDH5A1 gene leading to elevated GABA, gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB), succinic semialdehyde (SSA), decreased glutamine and alterations in several other metabolites. The phenotype includes developmental and cognitive delays, hypotonia, seizures, neuropsychiatric morbidity and other nervous system pathologies. The composition of the intestinal flora of patients with SSADHD has not been characterized, and dysbiosis of the gut microbiome may unveil novel treatment paradigms. We investigated the gut microbiome in SSADHD using 16S ribosomal DNA sequencing and unmasked evidence of dysbiosis in both aldh5a1-deficient mice and patients with SSADHD. In the murine model, there was a reduction in alpha-diversity measurements, and there were 4 phyla, 3 classes, 5 orders, 9 families, and 15 genera that differed, with a total of 17 predicted metabolic pathways altered. In patients, there were changes in Fusobacterium, 3 classes, 4 orders, 11 families, and a predicted alteration in genes associated with the digestive system. We believe this is the first evaluation of microbiome structure in an IEM with a neurometabolic phenotype that is not treated dietarily.
34895557|a|OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the adaptation and implementation of an existing, evidence-based nutrition program for children with autism and their parents. METHODS: Children aged 7-12 years with autism and their parent participated in 6 weekly sessions. Recruitment, intervention, and data collection took place in a community health center in an urban area. RESULTS: Of the 50 referred participants, 38% attended the first classes, and 26% completed the program. Families and staff expressed satisfaction; parents reported increased physical activity, fruit, and vegetable intake in their children. Parents also desired continued learning and individualized recommendations. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Adapting family-centered nutrition programs can positively influence diet behaviors in children with autism. As many children with autism battle with obesity, the findings from this pilot provide important insight into supporting these families and can further inform the development of evidence-based practices currently lacking for children with autism and their families.
34895178|a|BACKGROUND: Emotional and behavioural problems linked to changes to expectations - resistance to change - are linked to disability in neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism spectrum disorder (ASD), Prader-Willi (PWS) and fragile X syndromes (FXS). Structuring routines is best practice for minimising current resistance to change. But complete structure is impractical and flexibility in early life may actually reduce later resistance by supporting cognitive development. We aimed to examine the psycho-social context of families with children at risk of developing resistance to change so as to identify design requirements for an intervention that strikes a beneficial balance between structure and flexibility. METHODS: Thirty-six caregivers of children aged 4-12 years (17 ASD, 15 PWS, and 4 FXS) took part in an interview designed collaboratively with 12 professional stakeholders. RESULTS: Children need to feel like they are in control of flexibility but they also need support in choice making, understanding plans (using individually tailored visuals) and anxiety reduction. Caregivers need an accessible approach that they have full control over, and which they can tailor for their child. Caregivers also need clear guidance, education and support around structure and flexibility. CONCLUSIONS: We propose a digital approach which addresses the needs identified. It tackles the most perplexing challenge by presenting flexibility to children in the context of a game that children can feel they have full control over, whilst caregivers can maintain control in reality. Furthermore, individualised support for children and caregivers would be enabled.
34895138|a|BACKGROUND: Copy number variants (CNVs) are the gain or loss of DNA segments in the genome. Studies have shown that CNVs are linked to various disorders, including autism, intellectual disability, and schizophrenia. Consequently, the interest in studying a possible association of CNVs to specific disease traits is growing. However, due to the specific multi-dimensional characteristics of the CNVs, methods for testing the association between CNVs and the disease-related traits are still underdeveloped. We propose a novel multi-dimensional CNV kernel association test (MCKAT) in this paper. We aim to find significant associations between CNVs and disease-related traits using kernel-based methods. RESULTS: We address the multi-dimensionality in CNV characteristics. We first design a single pair CNV kernel, which contains three sub-kernels to summarize the similarity between two CNVs considering all CNV characteristics. Then, aggregate single pair CNV kernel to the whole chromosome CNV kernel, which summarizes the similarity between CNVs in two or more chromosomes. Finally, the association between the CNVs and disease-related traits is evaluated by comparing the similarity in the trait with kernel-based similarity using a score test in a random effect model. We apply MCKAT on genome-wide CNV datasets to examine the association between CNVs and disease-related traits, which demonstrates the potential usefulness the proposed method has for the CNV association tests. We compare the performance of MCKAT with CKAT, a uni-dimensional kernel method. Based on the results, MCKAT indicates stronger evidence, smaller p-value, in detecting significant associations between CNVs and disease-related traits in both rare and common CNV datasets. CONCLUSION: A multi-dimensional copy number variant kernel association test can detect statistically significant associated CNV regions with any disease-related trait. MCKAT can provide biologists with CNV hot spots at the cytogenetic band level that CNVs on them may have a significant association with disease-related traits. Using MCKAT, biologists can narrow their investigation from the whole genome, including many genes and CNVs, to more specific cytogenetic bands that MCKAT identifies. Furthermore, MCKAT can help biologists detect significantly associated CNVs with disease-related traits across a patient group instead of examining each subject's CNVs case by case.
34894057|a|SCN2A-related disorders include intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, seizures, episodic ataxia, and schizophrenia. In this study, the phenotype-genotype association in SCN2A-related disorders was further delineated by collecting detailed clinical and molecular characteristics. Using previously proposed genotype-phenotype hypotheses based on variant function and position, the potential of phenotype prediction from the variants found was examined. Patients were identified through the Deciphering Developmental Disorders study and gene matching strategies. Phenotypic information and variant interpretation evidence were collated. Seventeen previously unreported patients and five patients who had been previously reported (but with minimal phenotypic and segregation data) were included (10 males, 12 females; median age 10.5 years). All patients had developmental delays and the majority had intellectual disabilities. Seizures were reported in 15 of 22 (68.2%), four of 22 (18.2%) had autism spectrum disorder and no patients were reported with episodic ataxia. The majority of variants were de novo. One family had presumed gonadal mosaicism. The correlation of the use of sodium channel-blocking antiepileptic drugs with phenotype or genotype was variable. These data suggest that variant type and position alone can provide some predictive information about the phenotype in a proportion of cases, but more precise assessment of variant function is needed for meaningful phenotype prediction.
34893870|a|The eutherian-specific SNORD116 family of repeated box C/D snoRNA genes is suspected to play a major role in the Prader Willi syndrome (PWS), yet its molecular function remains poorly understood. Here, we combined phylogenetic and molecular analyses to identify candidate RNA targets. Based on the analysis of several eutherian orthologs, we found evidence of extensive birth-and-death and conversion events during SNORD116 gene history. However, the consequences for phylogenetic conservation were heterogeneous along the gene sequence. The standard snoRNA elements necessary for RNA stability and association with dedicated core proteins were the most conserved, in agreement with the hypothesis that SNORD116 generate genuine snoRNAs. Also, one of the two antisense elements (ASEs) typically involved in RNA target recognition was largely dominated by a unique sequence present in at least one subset of gene paralogs in most species, likely the result of a selective effect. In agreement with a functional role, this ASE exhibited a hybridization capacity with putative mRNA targets that was strongly conserved in Eutherians. Moreover, transient downregulation experiments in human cells showed that Snord116 controls the expression and splicing levels of these mRNAs. The functions of two of them, diacylglycerol kinase kappa (Dgkk) and Neuroligin 3 (Nlgn3), extend the description of the molecular bases of PWS and reveal unexpected molecular links with the Fragile X syndrome and autism spectrum disorders.
34893316|a|BACKGROUND: Whether labour epidural analgesia impacts risk of neurodevelopmental disorders in offspring is unsettled, raising public and scientific concerns. We explored the association between maternal labour epidural analgesia and autism spectrum disorder, and specific developmental disorder, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, intellectual disability, and epilepsy in offspring. METHODS: This nationwide population-based cohort study included 624 952 live-born singletons delivered by women who intended to deliver vaginally (i.e. vaginal and intrapartum Caesarean deliveries) in Denmark from 2005 to 2016. A total of 80 862 siblings discordant for exposure to labour epidural analgesia were analysed in a sibling-matched analysis. Both full-cohort and sibling-matched analyses were performed to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) of offspring risk of autism spectrum disorder, specific developmental disorder, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, intellectual disability, and epilepsy, according to exposure to labour epidural analgesia, adjusted for maternal socio-economic, pregnancy, and perinatal covariates. RESULTS: In the full cohort, maternal labour epidural analgesia was associated with autism spectrum disorder in offspring (HR 1.11; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.04-1.18); however, in the sibling-matched analysis, no association with autism spectrum disorder was found (HR 1.03; 95% CI: 0.84-1.27). The association between labour epidural analgesia and specific developmental disorder (HR 1.12; 95% CI: 1.03-1.22) in the full cohort also disappeared in the sibling-matched analysis (HR 1.01; 95% CI: 0.78-1.31). No association between maternal labour epidural analgesia and the remaining neurodevelopmental disorders was found overall (attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, HR 0.98; 95% CI: 0.92-1.03; intellectual disability, HR 0.98; 95% CI: 0.85-1.14; epilepsy, HR 0.89; 95% CI: 0.79-1.00) or in the sibling-matched analyses. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings did not support an association between maternal attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorder, specific developmental disorder, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, intellectual disability, or epilepsy.
34892605|a|The infant brain is rapidly developing, and these changes are reflected in scalp electroencephalography (EEG) features, including power spectrum and sleep spindle characteristics. These biomarkers not only mirror infant development, but they are also altered by conditions such as epilepsy, autism, developmental delay, and trisomy 21. Prior studies of early development were generally limited by small cohort sizes, lack of a specific focus on infancy (0-2 years), and exclusive use of visual marking for sleep spindles. Therefore, we measured the EEG power spectrum and sleep spindles in 240 infants ranging from 0-24 months. To rigorously assess these metrics, we used both clinical visual assessment and computational techniques, including automated sleep spindle detection. We found that the peak frequency and power of the posterior dominant rhythm (PDR) increased with age, and a corresponding peak occurred in the EEG power spectra. Based on both clinical and computational measures, spindle duration decreased with age, and spindle synchrony increased with age. Our novel metric of spindle asymmetry suggested that peak spindle asymmetry occurs at 6-9 months of age.Clinical Relevance- Here we provide a robust characterization of the development of EEG brain rhythms during infancy. This can be used as a basis of comparison for studies of infant neurological disease, including epilepsy, autism, developmental delay, and trisomy 21.
34892579|a|Atypical sensory processing is now considered a ubiquitous feature of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and is responsible for the atypical sensory-based behaviours seen in these individuals. Specifically, emotional arousal is a critical ASD target since it comprises emotion regulation and sensory processing, two core aspects of autism. So, in this project, we used task-based fMRI and a well-catalogued dataset of videos with variable arousal levels to characterize the sensory processing of emotional arousal content in ASD and typically developed controls. Our analysis revealed a difference in the secondary attention network where ASD individuals showed a clear yet lateralized preference to the dorsal attention network, whereas the neurotypical individuals preferred the ventral attention network.
34892371|a|Prenatal uptake of valproic acid (VPA) was associated with increased risk of fetal cardiac anomalies and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), but uptake of VPA is considered the only effective treatment for epilepsy and other neurological disorders. Up until now, little is known about the effect of VPA on maternal - fetal heart rate (HR) coupling patterns; therefore, this study aims at studying such patterns in mice on embryonic day 15.5 (E15.5). At E12.5, 8 mothers were injected with VPA (VPA group) and another 8 mothers were injected with saline (control group). At E15.5, electrocardiogram (ECG) records of 15 minutes were collected from the 16 mothers and 25 fetuses. A maximum of 5-minutes and a minimum of 1-minute were selected from the ECG data for analysis. Mean RR intervals and coupling ratios and their occurrence percentages were calculated per 1minute. 1-minute analysis was done for periods with no arrhythmia and clear R peaks. The total number of 1-minute segments that were analyzed was 56 for the saline group and 54 for the VPA group. The correlation analysis between the 1:3 and 2:6 coupling ratios and RR intervals revealed that the ratios were significantly correlated in the saline group, whereas no significant correlations were observed in the VPA group. The results further revealed that fetal RR intervals are strongly correlated with maternal RR intervals in the saline group, but the same correlation is different in the VPA group. The presented results imply that maintaining certain coupling patterns are important for proper fetal cardiac development and maternal uptake of VPA may affect maternal-fetal HRs interactions.
34892319|a|Social skills training by human coaches is a well-established method to obtain appropriate social interaction skills and strengthen social self-efficacy. Our previous works automated social skills training by developing a virtual agent that teaches social skills through interaction. This study attempts to investigate the effect of virtual agent design on automated social skills training. We prepared images and videos of a virtual agent, and a total of 912 crowdsourced workers rated the virtual agents by answering questions. We investigated the acceptability, likeability, and other impressions of the virtual agents and their relationship to the individuals' characteristics to design personalized virtual agents. As a result, a female anime-type virtual agent was rated as the most likable. We also confirmed that participants' gender, age, and autistic traits are related to the ratings. We believe our findings are important in designing a personalized virtual trainer.Clinical relevance- This study examines the effect of virtual agent design on social skills training. Our findings are important in designing a personalized virtual trainer.
34891973|a|Facial emotion recognition (FER) is useful in many different applications and could offer significant benefit as part of feedback systems to train children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) who struggle to recognize facial expressions and emotions. This project explores the potential of real time FER based on the use of local regions of interest combined with a machine learning approach. Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) was implemented for feature extraction, along with 3 different classifiers, 2 based on k-Nearest Neighbor and 1 using Support Vector Machine (SVM) classification. Model performance was compared using accuracy of randomly selected validation sets after training on random training sets of the Oulu-CASIA database. Image classes were distributed evenly, and accuracies of up to 98.44% were observed with small variation depending on data distributions. The region selection methodology provided a compromise between accuracy and number of extracted features, and validated the hypothesis a focus on smaller informative regions performs just as well as the entire image.
34891941|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is one of the most serious mental disorder in children. Machine learning based computer aided diagnosis (CAD) on resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) for ASD has attracted widespread attention. In recent years, learning using privileged information (LUPI), a supervised transfer learning method, has been generally used on multi-modality cases, which can transfer knowledge from source domain to target domain in order to improve the prediction capability on the target domain. However, multi-modality data is difficult to collect in clinical cases. LUPI method without introducing additional imaging modality images is worth further study. Random vector function link network plus (RVFL+) is a LUPI diagnosis algorithm, which has been proven to be effective for classification tasks. In this work, we proposed a self-paced learning based cascaded multi-column RVFL+ algorithm (SPL-cmcRVFL+) for ASD diagnosis. Initial classification model is trained using RVFL on the single-modal data (e.g. rs-fMRI). The output of the initial layer is then sent as privileged information (PI) to train the next layer of classification model. During this process, samples are selected using self-paced learning (SPL), which can adaptively select simple to difficult samples according to the loss value. The procedure is repeated until all samples are included. Experimental results show that our proposed method can accurately identify ASD and normal control, and outperforms other methods by a relatively higher classification accuracy.
34891932|a|Psychiatric diagnoses based on clinical manifestations are prone to be inaccurate. Schizophrenia (SZ) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) were historically considered as the same disorder, and they still have many overlaps of clinical symptoms in the current standard. Therefore, there is an urgent need to explore the potential biotypes for them using neuroimaging measures such as brain functional connectivity (FC). However, previous studies have not effectively leveraged FC in detecting biotypes. Considering that graph theory helps reveal the topological information in FC, in this paper, we propose a graph kernel-based clustering method to explore transdiagnostic biotypes using FC estimated from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data. In our method, frequent subnetworks are identified from the whole-brain FCs of all subjects, and then the graph kernel similarity is computed to measure the relationship between subjects for clustering. Based on fMRI data of 137 SZ and 150 ASD subjects, we obtained meaningful biotypes using our method, which shows significant differences between the identified biotypes in FC. In brief, our graph kernel-based clustering method is promising for transdiagnostic biotype detection.
34891705|a|Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) exhibit a wide diversity in type, number, and severity of social deficits as well as communicative and cognitive difficulties. It is a challenge to categorize the phenotypes of a particular ASD patient with their unique genetic variants. There is a need for a better understanding of the connections between genotype information and the phenotypes to sort out the heterogeneity of ASD. In this study, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and phenotype data obtained from a simplex ASD sample are combined using a PheWAS-inspired approach to construct a phenotype-phenotype network. The network is clustered, yielding groups of etiologically related phenotypes. These clusters are analyzed to identify relevant genes associated with each set of phenotypes. The results identified multiple discriminant SNPs associated with varied phenotype clusters such as ASD aberrant behavior (self-injury, compulsiveness and hyperactivity), as well as IQ and language skills. Overall, these SNPs were linked to 22 significant genes. An extensive literature search revealed that eight of these are known to have strong evidence of association with ASD. The others have been linked to related disorders such as mental conditions, cognition, and social functioning.Clinical relevance- This study further informs on connections between certain groups of ASD phenotypes and their unique genetic variants. Such insight regarding the heterogeneity of ASD would support clinicians to advance more tailored interventions and improve outcomes for ASD patients.
34891571|a|The increase in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) prevalence estimates over the last decades has driven a quest to develop new forms of rehabilitation that can be accessible to a larger part of this population. These rehabilitation approaches often take the form of computer games that are blind to the user's emotional state, which compromises their efficacy. In this study, a set of physiological signals were acquired in simultaneous with functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) with the future prospect of combining both kinds of data to create models capable of assessing the true emotional state of their users based on physiological response as a measure of autonomic nervous system, having as ground truth the activity of targeted brain regions. This paper describes an initial approach, focusing on the information contained on the physiological signals alone. A total of 35 features were extracted from biosignals' segments and subsequently used for automatic classification of arousal state (High Arousal vs. Low Arousal). The suboptimal results, although some extracted features present statistically significant differences, underline the challenging nature of our proposal and the added obstacles of recording physiological signals in the magnetic resonance environment. Further exploration of the measured signals is needed to gather a bigger number of discriminative features that can improve classification outcomes.
34891416|a|Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) are known to have significantly limited social interaction abilities, which are often manifested in different non-verbal cues of communication such as facial expression, atypical eye gaze response. While prior works leveraged the role of pupil response for screening ASD, limited works have been carried out to find the influence of emotion stimuli on pupil response for ASD screening. We, in this paper, design, develop, and evaluate a light-weight LSTM (Long-short Term Memory) model that captures pupil responses (pupil diameter, fixation duration, and fixation location) based on the social interaction with a virtual agent and detects ASD sessions based on short interactions. Our findings demonstrate that all the pupil responses vary significantly in the ASD sessions in response to the different emotion (angry, happy, neutral) stimuli applied. These findings reinforce the ASD screening with an average accuracy of 77%, while the accuracy improves further (>80%) with respect to angry and happy emotion stimuli.
34891341|a|Recent studies have attempted to recognize emotions by extracting features from electroencephalographic (EEG) signals using either linear and stationary, or linear and non-stationary transformations. However, as EEG signals are non-linear and non-stationary, it seems that a non-linear and non-stationary transformation may be more suitable. Despite the attractiveness of this hypothesis, until now, little studies have used such transformation. The current work presents a comparison between an approach to recognize positive and negative emotions using a non-linear and non-stationary transformation (Hilbert-Huang Transformation) with an approach using linear and non-stationary transformation (Discrete Wavelet Transform). The two approaches were compared using 200 EEG signals recorded from 10 subjects. The comparison indicated that an approach using the Hilbert-Huang Transformation statistically significantly classified emotions more accurately than a Wavelet-based approach (P < 0.02). This result implies that Hilbert-Huang Transformation is a promising tool to increase the prediction of emotional states, thereby helping to designing and developing more robust emotion recognition approaches.Clinical relevance- This remarks the potential of the Hilbert-Huang transform to enhance EEG-based emotion recognition systems, which can potentially help to diagnose and treat mental diseases, such as autism and depression.
34891321|a|Machine learning methods, such as deep learning, show promising results in the medical domain. However, the lack of interpretability of these algorithms may hinder their applicability to medical decision support systems. This paper studies an interpretable deep learning technique, called SincNet. SincNet is a convolutional neural network that efficiently learns customized band-pass filters through trainable sinc-functions. In this study, we use SincNet to analyze the neural activity of individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), who experience characteristic differences in neural oscillatory activity. In particular, we propose a novel SincNet-based neural network for detecting emotions in ASD patients using EEG signals. The learned filters can be easily inspected to detect which part of the EEG spectrum is used for predicting emotions. We found that our system automatically learns the high-alpha (9-13 Hz) and beta (13-30 Hz) band suppression often present in individuals with ASD. This result is consistent with recent neuroscience studies on emotion recognition, which found an association between these band suppressions and the behavioral deficits observed in individuals with ASD. The improved interpretability of SincNet is achieved without sacrificing performance in emotion recognition.
34891241|a|Studying the animal models of human neuropsychiatric disorders can facilitate the understanding of mechanisms of symptoms both physiologically and genetically. Previous studies have shown that ultrasonic vocalisations (USVs) of mice might be efficient markers to distinguish the wild type group and the model of autism spectrum disorder (mASD). Nevertheless, in-depth analysis of these 'silence' sounds by leveraging the power of advanced computer audition technologies (e. g., deep learning) is limited. To this end, we propose a pilot study on using a large-scale pre-trained audio neural network to extract high-level representations from the USVs of mice for the task on detection of mASD. Experiments have shown a best result reaching an unweighted average recall of 79.2 % for the binary classification task in a rigorous subject-independent scenario. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time to analyse the sounds that cannot be heard by human beings for the detection of mASD mice. The novel findings can be significant to motivate future works with according means on studying animal models of human patients.
34891220|a|
34890953|a|The present study explored the early development of social attention of toddlers at high familial risk (HR) for autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Eighteen HR toddlers and twenty-two toddlers at low familial risk for ASD (LR) between 11 and 24 months were asked to watch paired social and non-social videos. We found that: (1) the initial social preference in HR group decreased with age, but not in LR group; (2) both groups showed significant social habituation across trials, but HR group habituated slightly slower as age increased. These findings suggest that atypical social attention could be an early characteristic of toddlers at high familial risk for ASD.
34890046|a|BACKGROUND: This longitudinal study of autism symptom trajectories provides unique information that can characterize autism features and diagnostic patterns from childhood to adulthood. METHODS: Participants (n = 155) were part of a longitudinal cohort referred for possible autism where in-person assessments were completed at ages 2, 3, 5, 9, 19, and 25. Assessors were blinded to previous diagnoses. Based on adult best estimate diagnoses, participants were categorized into one of the four groups: Retained ASD, Lost ASD, Never Had ASD, or Gained ASD Diagnosis. To examine developmental changes in autism symptoms, mixed models indicated the rate of change in ADOS CSS and ADI-R scores in each diagnostic group. RESULTS: A subset of participants with VIQ> and <70 were assigned a diagnosis in adulthood that differed from diagnoses earlier in development. Across cognitive levels, the majority of novel diagnoses emerged in adulthood. For those with VIQ > 70, improvements in ADOS CSS over time for the Lost Diagnosis group and worsening in CSS in the Gained Diagnosis group were gradual. Individuals with VIQ > 70 who lost a diagnosis even in adulthood could be distinguished on CSS and ADI-R scores by age 5 from those who retained their ASD diagnosis. Although most participants with VIQ < 70 saw decreases in autistic symptoms as a whole, changes in autism diagnoses were confounded by disentangling profound intellectual disability as a differential diagnosis or co-occurrence. Only the Never Had Diagnosis group revealed significant changes in ADOS scores over time, with autism symptoms increasing. CONCLUSIONS: Associated with gradual changes in core features of autism beginning in childhood, diagnoses of autism can shift across development.
34889701|a|OBJECTIVE: There is higher risk for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) across many pediatric neurological conditions characterized by vision impairment or hearing loss. Early and accurate identification of ASD is imperative in promoting access to appropriate and early evidenced-based intervention; however, differential diagnosis can be particularly challenging in children with sensory impairment given the heterogeneity of ASD combined with the impact of vision impairment or hearing loss/deafness on development and behavior. A neuropsychologist's unique expertise and appreciation of the interplay between sensory and behavioral manifestations can be valuable for making an early and accurate ASD diagnosis in children who are blind/visually impaired or deaf/hard-of-hearing. This article highlights clinical considerations when identifying ASD within the context of vision impairment or hearing loss/deafness. METHOD: We discuss clinical considerations for the early identification of ASD in children who are blind/visually impaired and deaf/hard-of-hearing. Information presented in the article is based on a critical review of the literature and the expertise of the author group. CONCLUSION: Ongoing development of clinical expertise and evidence-based assessment methods are important when informing the early differential diagnosis of ASD in individuals with sensory impairment. Accurate identification is also vital for the development of targeted interventions across the lifespan.
34889523|a|Fragile X syndrome (FXS), the leading cause of inherited intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder, is associated with multiple neurobehavioral abnormalities including sleep difficulties. Nonetheless, frequency, severity, and consequences of sleep problems are still unclear. The Fragile X Online Registry with Accessible Research Database (FORWARD-version-3), including Clinician Report and Parent Report forms, was analyzed for frequency, severity, relationship with behavioral problems, and impact of sleep difficulties in a mainly pediatric cohort. A focused evaluation of sleep apnea was also conducted. Six surveyed sleep difficulties were moderately frequent (~23%-46%), relatively mild, affected predominantly younger males, and considered a problem for 7%-20% of families. Snoring was more prevalent in older individuals. All sleep difficulties were associated with irritability/aggression and most also to hyperactivity. Only severe snoring was correlated with sleep apnea (loud snoring: 30%; sleep apnea: 2%-3%). Sleep difficulties are prevalent in children with FXS and, although they tend to be mild, they are associated with behavioral problems and negative impact to families. Because of its cross-sectional nature, clinic-origin, use of ad hoc data collection forms, and lack of treatment data, the present study should be considered foundational for future research aiming at better recognition and management of sleep problems in FXS.
34889032|a|Genetic 16p11.2 and 22q11.2 deletions and duplications in humans may alter behavioral developmental trajectories increasing the risk of autism and schizophrenia spectrum disorders, and of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. In this review, we will concentrate on 16p11.2 and 22q11.2 deletions' effects on social functioning, beyond diagnostic categorization. We highlight diagnostic and social sub-constructs discrepancies. Notably, we contrast evidence from human studies with social profiling performed in several mouse models mimicking 16p11.2 and 22q11.2 deletion syndromes. Given the complexity of social behavior, there is a need to assess distinct social processes. This will be important to better understand the biology underlying such genetic-dependent dysfunctions, as well as to give perspective on how therapeutic strategies can be improved. Bridges and divergent points between human and mouse studies are highlighted. Overall, we give challenges and future perspectives to sort the genetics of social heterogeneity.
34888834|a|Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) has a prevalence rate of 1-3% in the general population and has been ranked as one of the top ten leading causes of illness-related disability (American Psychiatric Association 2013; Kessler et al. 2005). OCD is characterized by persistent intrusive thoughts (obsessions) and repetitive behaviors (compulsions) (Leckman et al. 1997). There are various OCD-related disorders, including Tourette syndrome (TS), grooming disorders (e.g., skin-picking, trichotillomania), and autism spectrum disorders (ASD) that share considerable overlapping features with OCD (Browne et al. 2014). Although the neurobiological basis of OCD still remains obscure, neuroimaging studies in patients with OCD and OCD-related disorders have consistently identified hyperactivity in orbitofrontal cortex and striatum (Cerliani et al. 2015; Hou et al. 2014; Jung et al. 2017; Neuner et al. 2014). However, the cellular and synaptic abnormalities underlying this hyperactivity are unclear. The most prominent theory regarding the underlying mechanisms of OCD and OCD-related disorders is an increased excitation to inhibition (E/I) ratio due to increased glutamatergic excitation or reduced GABAergic inhibition (Albin and Mink 2006; Rubenstein and Merzenich 2003; Wu et al. 2012). A proper E/I ratio is achieved by factors expressed in neuron and glia. In astrocytes, both the glutamate transporter GLT1 and GABA transporter GAT-3 are critical for regulating the E/I balance (Aida et al. 2015; Aizawa et al. 2020; Boddum et al. 2016; Cui et al. 2014; Kersante et al. 2013; Kiryk et al. 2008; Matos et al. 2018; Scimemi 2014; Sugimoto et al. 2018; Sugiyama et al. 2017; Tanaka et al. 1997; Zhao et al. 2018). Although astrocyte dysfunction has not been directly explored in OCD patients, several animal studies have found that astrocytes are involved in the pathophysiology of OCD. In this chapter, I highlight recent studies in which astrocyte dysfunction contributed to E/I imbalance, leading to pathological repetitive behaviors shared between patients with OCD, TS, and ASD.
34888278|a|Background: Families are integrally involved in day-to-day caregiving of children with neurodevelopmental and intellectual disabilities (NDID). Given the widespread and increasing prevalence of children with NDID and the impact of family caregiving on psychological, social, and economic implications for both the child and family, understanding and supporting these families is an important public health concern. Objective: We conducted a scoping review on peer support networks to understand their implications on families. Considering increasing prevalence of NDID's, understanding the implications of existing networks is critical to improve and nurture future support networks that can complement and reduce the burden on existing formal support systems. Design: A comprehensive search of multiple databases was conducted. Articles were screened by two reviewers and any disagreements were resolved by a third reviewer. We explored existing research on parent-to-parent peer support networks, which included networks that developed informally as well as those that involved a formal facilitator for the group interpersonal processes. There were no limits on the study design, date and setting of the articles. We included all research studies in English that included an identifier for (i) "peer support networks," (ii) "children with neurodevelopmental and intellectual disabilities" and (iii) "family caregiver outcomes." Results: We identified 36 articles. Majority of the studies were conducted in North America, and were face to face networks. They included families of children with a wide range of NDIDs. Relevant information extracted from different studies highlighted peer support network characteristics and development process, needs of family caregivers attending these networks, factors affecting caregiver participation and the impact of peer support networks on family caregivers. These networks represent a way to strengthen family caregivers, developing resilience and social interactions. Family caregivers sharing similar experiences support one another and provide critical information to each other. Although results are encouraging, future studies incorporating improved study designs are needed to better evaluate the effectiveness of peer support networks. Furthermore, studies where peer support networks develop organically while the child is supported are warranted. Conclusion: Although results obtained are encouraging, our findings support the need for further research studies of peer support networks with better designs and more detailed description of the factors involved in the development.
34888262|a|[This corrects the article DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.759435.].
34888170|a|Neurodevelopmental disorders are a group of conditions classified together by the most recent edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders which include intellectual disability, communication disorders, autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, specific learning disorder (SLD), and motor disorders. SLD is present in many students, who exhibit significant difficulties in the acquisition of reading, written expression, and mathematics, mostly due to problems with executive functions (EF). The present study is a review of the current situation of neurodevelopmental disorders and SLD focusing on the benefits of the response to intervention model (RtI), which allows the combination of evaluation and intervention processes. It also addresses the key role of EF. The importance of adapting RtI to new possibilities such as the use of virtual reality is discussed and a theoretical framework for carrying that out is provided.
34887721|a|Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are two of the most represented neurodevelopmental conditions in childhood. The diagnostic shift introduced by the DSM-5, allowing a combined diagnosis of ADHD and ASD, poses different clinical challenges related to diagnostic overshadowing, accuracy of clinical judgment and potential delay in an ASD diagnosis in children presenting with ADHD. Here we tried to disentangle the clinical phenotype and specificity of the two co-occurring conditions in relation to autism traits and empathy, by comparing children with ASD with and without comorbid ADHD with children presenting ADHD only and children with typical development. The child versions of the Autism Quotient (C-AQ) and Empathy Quotient (C-EQ) were administered to a total sample of 198 male children between 6 and 14 years old with age appropriate language skills and normal intelligence. Univariate analysis demonstrated no significant differences in the C-AQ total and subscale scores as well as the C-EQ between children with ASD and children with ASD + ADHD, while children with ADHD alone presented an intermediate phenotype between ASD and TD. Furthermore, a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was applied to discriminate among the different phenotypes. We found that the C-AQ and C-EQ were accurate at distinguishing with satisfactory reliability between: (a) ASD vs. non- ASD (N-ASD) groups comprising both ADHD and TD children (Area Under the Curve AUC 88% for C-AQ and 81% for C-EQ); (b) ASD and TD (AUC 92% for C-AQ and 95% for C-EQ); (c) ASD and ADHD (AUC 80% for C-AQ and 68% for C-EQ). Our data confirm the reliability of the C-AQ and C-EQ as behavioral markers to differentiate ASD (regardless of comorbid ADHD) from an ADHD condition and TD. Interestingly, in our sample an ADHD condition does not increase the severity of the clinical phenotype in terms of autism traits distribution and empathy, suggesting that the psychological measures detected by the two quantitative instruments are independent of ADHD traits. This evidence will contribute to the translational efforts in developing better tailored treatments and preventive strategies.
34887588|a|Genetic intervention is increasingly being explored as a therapeutic option for debilitating disorders of the central nervous system. The safety and efficacy of gene therapies rely upon expressing a transgene in affected cells while minimizing off-target expression. Here we show organ-specific targeting of adeno-associated virus (AAV) capsids after intravenous delivery, which we achieved by employing a Cre-transgenic-based screening platform and sequential engineering of AAV-PHP.eB between the surface-exposed AA452 and AA460 of VP3. From this selection, we identified capsid variants that were enriched in the brain and targeted away from the liver in C57BL/6J mice. This tropism extends to marmoset (Callithrix jacchus), enabling robust, non-invasive gene delivery to the marmoset brain after intravenous administration. Notably, the capsids identified result in distinct transgene expression profiles within the brain, with one exhibiting high specificity to neurons. The ability to cross the blood-brain barrier with neuronal specificity in rodents and non-human primates enables new avenues for basic research and therapeutic possibilities unattainable with naturally occurring serotypes.
34887388|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder that is associated with functional brain alterations that underlie the expression of behaviour. Males are diagnosed up to four times more than females, and sex differences have been identified in memory, cognitive flexibility, verbal fluency, and social communication. Unfortunately, there exists a lack of information on the sex-dependent mechanisms of ASD, as well as biological markers to distinguish sex-specific symptoms in ASD. This can often result in a standardized diagnosis for individuals across the spectrum, despite significant differences in the various ASD subtypes. Alterations in neuronal connectivity and oscillatory activity, such as is observed in ASD, are highly coupled to behavioural states. Yet, despite the well-identified sexual dimorphisms that exist in ASD, these functional patterns have rarely been analyzed in the context of sex differences or symptomology. This review summarizes alterations in neuronal oscillatory function in ASD, discusses the age, region, symptom and sex-specific differences that are currently observed across the spectrum, and potential targets for regulating neuronal oscillatory activity in ASD. The need to identify sex-specific biomarkers, in order to facilitate specific diagnostic criteria and allow for more targeted therapeutic approaches for ASD will also be discussed.
34887239|a|OBJECTIVE: Infantile spasms syndrome is a severe epileptic encephalopathy. Management of infantile spasms remains challenging because of pharmacoresistant forms and relapsing seizures. A high number of patients with this syndrome have neurodevelopmental delay. The main objective of our study was to determine predictors to measure the neurodevelopmental outcome of patients with infantile spasms. METHODS: We prospectively evaluated 31 patients with infantile spasms from 2014 to 2017 at three hospitals in Tbilisi, Georgia. Various demographic data were evaluated at the first visit; video-EEG, brain MRI and neurodevelopmental evaluation were performed upon admission. A diary to record spasms was provided and completed by all parents/caregivers. Seizures were recorded on video and the phenomenology of infantile spasms was studied. Children were followed for one and two years after the first assessment. RESULTS: Neurodevelopmental deterioration was revealed in 61.1% on the second and 53% on the third evaluation in patients with onset of spasms before seven months of age. The mean score on the ASQ communication domain was low among structural cases. Eleven patients with pre-existing delay had developmental regression based on the second evaluation (Fisher's exact test: 7.2; df 1; p=0.01). SIGNIFICANCE: Our study reveals that age at onset of infantile spasms at less than seven months, pre-existing developmental delay, low ASQ scores and structural abnormalities on MRI are predictors of poor developmental outcome. Our data suggest that clinicians should inform parents at the first clinical evaluation about prognosis, and intervention should be started as early as possible in order to improve development.
34886823|a|BACKGROUND: Bainbridge-Ropers syndrome (BRPS) [OMIM#615485] is a neurodevelopmental disorder, characterized by delayed psychomotor development with generalized hypotonia, moderate to severe intellectual disability, poor or absent speech, feeding difficulties, growth failure, dysmorphic craniofacial features and minor skeletal features. The aim of this study was to investigate the genetic etiology of a Sudanese boy with severe developmental delay, intellectual disability, and craniofacial phenotype using trio-based whole-exome sequencing. To our knowledge, no patients with ASXL3 gene variant c.3043C>T have been reported detailedly in literature. CASE PRESENTATION: The patient (male, 3 years 6 months) was the first born of a healthy non-consanguineous couple originating from Sudan, treated for "psychomotor retardation" for more than 8 months in Yiwu. The patient exhibited severely delayed milestones in physiological and intellectual developmental stages, language impairment, poor eye-contact, lack of subtle motions of fingers, fear of claustrophobic space, hypotonia, clinodactyly, autistic features. Peripheral blood samples were collected from the patient and his parents. Trio-based whole-exome sequencing(Trio-WES) identified a de novo heterozygous ASXL3 gene variant c.3043C>T;p.Q1015X. Sanger sequencing verified variants of this family. CONCLUSION: Trio-WES analysis identified a de novo nonsense variant (c.3043C>T) of ASXL3 gene in a Sudanese boy. To our knowledge, the patient with this variant has not been reported previously in literature. This study presents a new case for ASXL3 gene variants, which expanded the mutational and phenotypic spectrum.
34886158|a|Adolescent neuropsychiatric disorders have been recently increasing due to genetic and environmental influences. Abnormal brain development before and after birth contribute to the pathology of neuropsychiatric disorders. However, it is difficult to experimentally investigate because of the complexity of brain and ethical constraints. Recently generated human brain organoids from pluripotent stem cells are considered as a promising in vitro model to recapitulate brain development and diseases. To better understand how brain organoids could be applied to investigate neuropsychiatric disorders, we analyzed the key consideration points, including how to generate brain organoids from pluripotent stem cells, the current application of brain organoids in recapitulating neuropsychiatric disorders and the future perspectives. This review covered what have been achieved on modeling the cellular and neural circuit deficits of neuropsychiatric disorders and those challenges yet to be solved. Together, this review aims to provide a fundamental understanding of how to generate brain organoids to model neuropsychiatric disorders, which will be helpful in improving the mental health of adolescents.
34886124|a|The purpose of this pilot study was to examine the feasibility of a fundamental motor skills (FMS) intervention with two groups on the acquisition of FMS of children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). We randomly assigned families (n = 15) of children with ASD aged 4-11 years into two groups (a workshop or a home-based group) focused on FMS development. Both groups participated in a 10-week intervention and were given the same instructional manual and adapted physical activity equipment. The workshop group also attended four in-person workshops targeting the needs of children with ASD and their parents. Children were tested on their FMS using the third edition of the Test of Gross Motor Development at the start and end of the intervention and then three months following the intervention. The recruitment rate was 50%, and the retention rate was 80% for all participants. The intervention for groups was safe and accepted by the participants as evaluated by post-program interviews. The outcomes of this pilot study suggest that parents can facilitate the acquisition of FMS of their children with ASD. Although these results are positive, there is a need to further identify effective interventions for FMS development in children with ASD.
34886072|a|Autistic children and adolescents are at high risk of dental disease and experience oral health inequalities. They consistently show high levels of unmet needs in relation to their oral health and access to dental care. There are no systematic reviews that bring together the evidence on the factors that influence oral hygiene behaviours, and access to and provision of dental care for autistic children and adolescents. A systematic search will be carried out in eight international databases and in grey literature of qualitative, quantitative and mixed method research studies from countries with a High Development Index which relate to oral health behaviours, and access to and provision of dental care. Only studies where participants are autistic children and adolescents aged 19 years or under, parents/guardians/caregivers, support staff, or oral health care providers will be included. Quantitative and qualitative data will be synthesized together through data transformation using a convergent integrated approach. Thematic synthesis will be used to carry out an inductive analysis of the data. The findings from the systematic review which this protocol generates will be used in the development of an appropriate local clinic care pathway for autistic children/adolescents and to inform national policies and practices. Prospero registration: CRD 42021248764.
34884881|a|The objective of the present study was to review the existing data on the association between Zn status and characteristics of gut microbiota in various organisms and the potential role of Zn-induced microbiota in modulating systemic effects. The existing data demonstrate a tight relationship between Zn metabolism and gut microbiota as demonstrated in Zn deficiency, supplementation, and toxicity studies. Generally, Zn was found to be a significant factor for gut bacteria biodiversity. The effects of physiological and nutritional Zn doses also result in improved gut wall integrity, thus contributing to reduced translocation of bacteria and gut microbiome metabolites into the systemic circulation. In contrast, Zn overexposure induced substantial alterations in gut microbiota. In parallel with intestinal effects, systemic effects of Zn-induced gut microbiota modulation may include systemic inflammation and acute pancreatitis, autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, as well as fetal alcohol syndrome and obesity. In view of both Zn and gut microbiota, as well as their interaction in the regulation of the physiological functions of the host organism, addressing these targets through the use of Zn-enriched probiotics may be considered an effective strategy for health management.
34884841|a|Many types of stressors have an impact on brain development, function, and disease susceptibility including immune stressors, psychosocial stressors, and exposure to drugs of abuse. We propose that these diverse developmental stressors may utilize a common mechanism that underlies impaired cognitive function and neurodevelopmental disorders such as schizophrenia, autism, and mood disorders that can develop in later life as a result of developmental stressors. While these stressors are directed at critical developmental windows, their impacts are long-lasting. Immune activation is a shared pathophysiology across several different developmental stressors and may thus be a targetable treatment to mitigate the later behavioral deficits. In this review, we explore different types of prenatal and perinatal stressors and their contribution to disease risk and underlying molecular mechanisms. We highlight the impact of developmental stressors on microglia biology because of their early infiltration into the brain, their critical role in brain development and function, and their long-lived status in the brain throughout life. Furthermore, we introduce innate immune memory as a potential underlying mechanism for developmental stressors' impact on disease. Finally, we highlight the molecular and epigenetic reprogramming that is known to underlie innate immune memory and explain how similar molecular mechanisms may be at work for cells to retain a long-term perturbation after exposure to developmental stressors.
34884472|a|The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays crucial roles in the anterior pituitary gland via the mechanism of cell-ECM interaction. Since bisphenol A (BPA), a well-known endocrine disruptor, can cross through the placenta from mother to fetus and bind with estrogen receptors, cell populations in the neonatal anterior pituitary gland could be the target cells affected by this chemical. The present study treated maternal rats with 5000 microg/kg body weight of BPA daily throughout the pregnancy period and then investigated the changes in ECM-producing cells, i.e., pericytes and folliculostellate (FS) cells, including their ECM production in the neonatal anterior pituitary at Day 1. We found that pericytes and their collagen synthesis reduced, consistent with the increase in the number of FS cells that expressed several ECM regulators-matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 9 and the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinase (TIMP) family. The relative MMP9/TIMP1 ratio was extremely high, indicating that the control of ECM homeostasis was unbalanced. Moreover, transmission electron microscopy showed the unorganized cell cluster in the BPA-treated group. This study revealed that although the mother received BPA at the "no observed adverse effect" level, alterations in ECM-producing cells as well as collagen and the related ECM balancing genes occurred in the neonatal anterior pituitary gland.
34884263|a|Drowning is one of the leading causes of death in children and teenagers. Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are at increased risk for drowning. Improvements in swim skills have been observed in children with ASD participating in learn-to-swim programs. However, it is unclear if age, co-occurring conditions, and/or the dose of practice influence swim skills in this population. To this end, a secondary data analysis of iCan Swim program data was conducted to determine the efficacy of the 5-day adapted learn-to-swim program for a cohort of children with ASD ages 3-16 years (n = 86). Participant swim level was evaluated at the start and end of the program. Linear mixed-effects regression was used to examine the effects of Time (start/end), Age, Dose of Swim Practice (i.e., total time-time out of the water), and ADHD status on the overall swim level. Participants significantly increased the swim level from the beginning to the end of the program (B = 0.63, 95% CI = 0.52-0.74), and participants with ASD and co-occurring ADHD had greater swim levels regardless of Time than those without ADHD (B = 0.45, 95% CI = 0.05-0.84). Overall, iCan Swim is effective in improving the swim skills of children and teenagers with ASD.
34883399|a|BACKGROUND: The objectives of this study were to: 1) characterize the sleep behaviors and symptoms of individuals with Christianson Syndrome (CS) by means of validated questionnaires; and 2) determine their associations with daytime emotional and behavioral symptoms in this population. METHODS: Participants included 16 boys genetically diagnosed with CS, between 2.5 and 40 years of age (M = 14.5 +- 8.08). Parents completed questionnaires regarding the sleep, daytime behavior, and health of their child. RESULTS: Of the participants, 31% did not obtain the recommended amount of sleep for their age, 43% experienced a prolonged sleep latency, and 88% had a clinical or sub-clinical score for at least one subscale of the Sleep Disturbance Scale for Children (SDSC). Specific problems detected included insomnia, sleep-wake transition disorders, periodic limb movements in sleep, and sleep related breathing disorders. About half of the participants manifested emotional and behavioral problems at clinical levels. Higher levels of sleep disturbances were associated with higher levels of behavioral and emotional daytime symptoms. CONCLUSIONS: Sleep problems are common in individuals with CS and are associated with daytime behavioral and emotional symptoms.
34883136|a|
34883135|a|The Na-K-2Cl cotransporter NKCC1 and the neuron-specific K-Cl cotransporter KCC2 are considered attractive CNS drug targets because altered neuronal chloride regulation and consequent effects on GABAergic signaling have been implicated in numerous CNS disorders. While KCC2 modulators are not yet clinically available, the loop diuretic bumetanide has been used off-label in attempts to treat brain disorders and as a tool for NKCC1 inhibition in preclinical models. Bumetanide is known to have anticonvulsant and neuroprotective effects under some pathophysiological conditions. However, as shown in several species from neonates to adults (mice, rats, dogs, and by extrapolation in humans), at the low clinical doses of bumetanide approved for diuresis, this drug has negligible access into the CNS, reaching levels that are much lower than what is needed to inhibit NKCC1 in cells within the brain parenchyma. Several drug discovery strategies have been initiated over the last ~15 years to develop brain-permeant compounds that, ideally, should be selective for NKCC1 to eliminate the diuresis mediated by inhibition of renal NKCC2. The strategies employed to improve the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of NKCC1 blockers include evaluation of other clinically approved loop diuretics; development of lipophilic prodrugs of bumetanide; development of side-chain derivatives of bumetanide; and unbiased high-throughput screening approaches of drug discovery based on large chemical compound libraries. The main outcomes are that (1), non-acidic loop diuretics such as azosemide and torasemide may have advantages as NKCC1 inhibitors vs. bumetanide; (2), bumetanide prodrugs lead to significantly higher brain levels than the parent drug and have lower diuretic activity; (3), the novel bumetanide side-chain derivatives do not exhibit any functionally relevant improvement of CNS accessibility or NKCC1 selectivity vs. bumetanide; (4) novel compounds discovered by high-throughput screening may resolve some of the inherent problems of bumetanide, but as yet this has not been achieved. Thus, further research is needed to optimize the design of brain-permeant NKCC1 inhibitors. In parallel, a major challenge is to identify the mechanisms whereby various NKCC1-expressing cellular targets of these drugs within (e.g., neurons, oligodendrocytes or astrocytes) and outside the brain parenchyma (e.g., the blood-brain barrier, the choroid plexus, and the endocrine system), as well as molecular off-target effects, might contribute to their reported therapeutic and adverse effects.
34883055|a|
34883054|a|
34883052|a|
34883050|a|
34883049|a|
34882945|a|The present study examined how maltreatment experience was associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) symptoms in children under institutional care. The key caregivers of children and adolescents aged 6 to 18 years who were under institutional care in Nagano prefecture, Japan were asked to answer the background questionnaire, ADHD-Rating Scale, and the Japanese children's version of the Autism-Spectrum Quotient. A total of 378 valid responses were obtained, of which 222 reported maltreatment experience prior to institutionalization. Both hyperactive/impulsive and inattentive scores were significantly higher in the maltreated group. Maltreatment experience was significantly associated with the presence of hyperactive/impulsive symptoms (p = 0.003) and inattentive symptoms (p = 0.027). Particularly, those who had experienced physical abuse were significantly more likely to have hyperactive/impulsive symptoms (p = 0.012) and autistic trait (p = 0.002). Thorough assessment of neurodevelopmental symptoms should be performed when placing children with maltreatment experience into institutional care.
34882790|a|BACKGROUND: While the cerebellum is traditionally known for its role in sensorimotor control, emerging research shows that particular subregions, such as right Crus I (RCrusI), support language and social processing. Indeed, cerebellar atypicalities are commonly reported in autism spectrum disorder (ASD), a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by socio-communicative impairments. However, the cerebellum's contribution to early socio-communicative development remains virtually unknown. METHODS: Here, we characterized functional connectivity within cerebro-cerebellar networks implicated in language/social functions in 9-month-old infants who exhibit distinct 3-year socio-communicative developmental profiles. We employed a data-driven clustering approach to stratify our sample of infants at high (n = 82) and low (n = 37) familial risk for ASD into three cohorts-Delayed, Late-Blooming, and Typical-who showed unique socio-communicative trajectories. We then compared the cohorts on indices of language and social development. Seed-based functional connectivity analyses with RCrusI were conducted on infants with fMRI data (n = 66). Cohorts were compared on connectivity estimates from a-priori regions, selected on the basis of reported coactivation with RCrusI during language/social tasks. RESULTS: The three trajectory-based cohorts broadly differed in social communication development, as evidenced by robust differences on numerous indices of language and social skills. Importantly, at 9 months, the cohorts showed striking differences in cerebro-cerebellar circuits implicated in language/social functions. For all regions examined, the Delayed cohort exhibited significantly weaker RCrusI connectivity compared to both the Late-Blooming and Typical cohorts, with no significant differences between the latter cohorts. CONCLUSIONS: We show that hypoconnectivity within distinct cerebro-cerebellar networks in infancy predicts altered socio-communicative development before delays overtly manifest, which may be relevant for early detection and intervention. As the cerebellum is implicated in prediction, our findings point to probabilistic learning as a potential intermediary mechanism that may be disrupted in infancy, cascading into alterations in social communication.
34882453|a|[Figure: see text].
34882323|a|The purpose of the study is to to identify key social and medical problems of childhood psychiatry by analysis of statistical and clinical data of Moscow health care institutions. It is established that actual problems are related to increasing of incidence of morbidity of mental disorders in children, their late detection, absence or unavailability of diagnostic techniques with high evidentiary effect, inability to use modern achievements of psychopharmacotherapy, close relationship of mental disorders with social factors, as well as with high stigmatization of mental health sphere. It is necessary to intensify research in studying etiopathogenetic factors, elaborating strategies of mental disorders prevention in childhood, clinical trials targeted to expand age range of application of medications and to icrease activities on destigmatization and psychoeducation in society.
34881779|a|Monoamine oxidase (MAO) deficiency and imbalanced levels of brain monoamines have been associated with developmental delay, neuropsychiatric disorders and aggressive behavior. Animal models are valuable tools to gain mechanistic insight into outcomes associated with MAO deficiency. Here we report a novel genetic model to study the effects of mao-loss-of-function in zebrafish. Quantitative PCR, in situ hybridization and immunocytochemistry were used to study neurotransmitter systems, and expression of relevant genes for brain development in zebrafish mao mutants. Larval and adult fish behavior was evaluated through different tests. A stronger serotonin immunoreactivity was detected in both mao+/- and mao-/- larvae when compared with mao+/+ siblings. Mao-/- larvae were hypoactive, presented decreased reactions to visual and acoustic stimuli. They also had impaired histaminergic and dopaminergic systems, abnormal expression of developmental markers, and they died within 20 days post-fertilization. Mao+/- fish were viable, grew until adulthood and demonstrated anxiety-like behavior and impaired social interactions when compared with adult mao+/+ siblings. Our results indicate that mao-/- and mao+/- mutants could be promising tools to study the roles of MAO in brain development and behavior.
34881676|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Autistic adults often have complex healthcare needs due to factors like having other health conditions, sensory sensitivities, and limited access to healthcare providers who are trained to provide care for them. All these factors may influence the healthcare services that autistic adults use. In this review, we searched six electronic research databases to gather the most recent evidence about how often autistic adults use five important healthcare services (the emergency department, hospitalization, outpatient mental health, preventive services, and primary care) compared to populations of non-autistic adults. A total of 16 articles were ultimately included in this review. Most articles found that autistic adults had equal or higher use of healthcare services than non-autistic adults. Autistic adults frequently used the emergency department and hospital. This may indicate that routine outpatient care in the community is not meeting their needs. Our findings show the importance of improving care at this level for autistic adults to reduce overuse of the emergency department (in this article referred to as ED) and hospital.
34881514|a|Autism can be understood as a concealable stigmatized identity. This is the first systematic review to synthesize the literature on autistic people's experiences of stigma and coping strategies. 2877 studies were screened and 27 were included in this review. The reviewed literature demonstrates that autistic individuals are acutely aware of being stereotyped, judged, and discriminated by others. Autistic people also show signs of internalizing stigma, rendering them more vulnerable to low self-worth and poorer mental health. To manage the impact of stigma, the included studies suggest that autistic individuals may use these strategies: concealment and camouflaging, selective disclosure and self-advocacy, as well as positive reframing and reconstructing identity. However, the evidence is limited and mixed in terms of how helpful and effective these strategies are. Future studies should include autistic populations with a wider range of intellectual abilities and explore interventions that can support autistic people in managing stigma to supplement interventions that seek to reduce stigma towards autistic people. The power of language in perpetuating and challenging stigma also has important implications for research and practice, underscoring the need for researchers and practitioners to reflect carefully on the messages they are communicating about autism.
34881437|a|BACKGROUND: Meta-analyses suggest an association between autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and obesity, but the factors underlying this association remain unclear. This study investigated the association between ASD and obesity stratified on intellectual disability (ID). In addition, in order to gain insight into possible shared etiological factors, the potential role of shared familial liability was examined. METHOD: We studied a cohort of 3,141,696 individuals by linking several Swedish nationwide registers. We identified 35,461 individuals with ASD and 61,784 individuals with obesity. Logistic regression models were used to estimate the association between ASD and obesity separately by ID and sex and by adjusting for parental education, psychiatric comorbidity, and psychotropic medication. Potential shared familial etiologic factors were examined by comparing the risk of obesity in full siblings, maternal and paternal half-siblings, and full- and half-cousins of individuals with ASD to the risk of obesity in relatives of individuals without ASD. RESULTS: Individuals with ASD + ID (OR = 3.76 [95% CI, 3.38-4.19]) and ASD-ID (OR = 3.40 [95% CI, 3.23-3.58]) had an increased risk for obesity compared with individuals without ASD. The associations remained statistically significant when adjusting for parental education, psychiatric comorbidity, and medication. Sex-stratified analyses indicated a higher relative risk for males compared with females, with statistically significant interaction effects for ASD-ID, but not for ASD+ID in the fully adjusted model. First-degree relatives of individuals with ASD+ID and ASD-ID had an increased risk of obesity compared with first-degree relatives of individuals without ASD. The obesity risk was similar in second-degree relatives of individuals with ASD+ID but was lower for and ASD-ID. Full cousins of individuals with ASD+ID had a higher risk compared with half-cousins of individuals with ASD+ID). A similar difference in the obesity risk between full cousins and half-cousins was observed for ASD-ID. CONCLUSIONS: Individuals with ASD and their relatives are at increased risk for obesity. The risk might be somewhat higher for males than females. This warrants further studies examining potential common pleiotropic genetic factors and shared family-wide environmental factors for ASD and obesity. Such research might aid in identifying specific risks and underlying mechanisms in common between ASD and obesity.
34880900|a|CHD8 represents one of the highest confidence genetic risk factors implied in Autism Spectrum Disorders, with most mutations leading to CHD8 haploinsufficiency and the insurgence of specific phenotypes, such as macrocephaly, facial dysmorphisms, intellectual disability, and gastrointestinal complaints. While extensive studies have been conducted on the possible consequences of CHD8 suppression and protein coding RNAs dysregulation during neuronal development, the effects of transcriptional changes of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) remain unclear. In this study, we focused on a peculiar class of natural antisense lncRNAs, SINEUPs, that enhance translation of a target mRNA through the activity of two RNA domains, an embedded transposable element sequence and an antisense region. By looking at dysregulated transcripts following CHD8 knock down (KD), we first identified RAB11B-AS1 as a potential SINEUP RNA for its domain configuration. Then we demonstrated that such lncRNA is able to increase endogenous RAB11B protein amounts without affecting its transcriptional levels. RAB11B has a pivotal role in vesicular trafficking, and mutations on this gene correlate with intellectual disability and microcephaly. Thus, our study discloses an additional layer of molecular regulation which is altered by CHD8 suppression. This represents the first experimental confirmation that naturally occurring SINEUP could be involved in ASD pathogenesis and underscores the importance of dysregulation of functional lncRNAs in neurodevelopment.
34880800|a|Background: Facial expressions transmit information about emotional state, facilitating communication and regulation in interpersonal relationships. Their acute recognition is essential in social adaptation and lacks among children suffering from autism spectrum disorders. The aim of our study was to validate the "Recognition of Facial Emotions: Tunisian Test for Children" among Tunisian children in order to assess facial emotion recognition in children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Methods: We conducted a cross-sectional study among neurotypical children from the general population. The final version of or test consisted of a static subtest of 114 photographs and a dynamic subtest of 36 videos expressing the six basic emotions (happiness, anger, sadness, disgust, fear and surprise), presented by actors of different ages and genders. The test items were coded according to Ekman's "Facial Action Coding System" method. The validation study focused on the validity of the content, the validity of the construct and the reliability. Results: We included 116 neurotypical children, from 7 to 12 years old. Our population was made up of 54 boys and 62 girls. The reliability's study showed good internal consistency for each subtest: the Cronbach coefficient was 0.88 for the static subtest and 0.85 for the dynamic subtest. The study of the internal structure through the exploratory factor analysis of the items of emotions and those of intensity showed that the distribution of the items in sub-domains was similar to their theoretical distribution. Age was significantly correlated to the mean of the overall score for both subtests (p < 10-3). Gender was no significantly correlated to the overall score (p = 0.15). High intensity photographs were better recognized. The emotion of happiness was the most recognized in both subtests. A significant difference between the overall score of the static and dynamic subtest, in favor of the dynamic one, was identified (p < 10-3). Conclusion: This work provides clinicians with a reliable tool to assess recognition of facial emotions in typically developing children.
34880730|a|[This corrects the article DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2020.00023.].
34880723|a|Studies in rodent models suggest that calls emitted by isolated pups serve as an early behavioral manifestation of communication deficits and autistic like behavior. Previous studies in our labs showed that gestational exposure to the pesticide chlorpyrifos (CPF) and the Mthfr-knock-out mice are associated with impaired social preference and restricted or repetitive behavior. To extend these studies, we examine how pup communication via ultrasonic vocalizations is altered in these ASD models. We implemented an unsupervised hierarchical clustering method based on the spectral properties of the syllables in order to exploit syllable classification to homogeneous categories while avoiding over-categorization. Comparative exploration of the spectral and temporal aspects of syllables emitted by pups in two ASD models point to the following: (1) Most clusters showed a significant effect of the ASD factor on the start and end frequencies and bandwidth and (2) The highest percent change due to the ASD factor was on the bandwidth and duration. In addition, we found sex differences in the spectral and temporal properties of the calls in both control groups as well as an interaction between sex and the gene/environment factor. Considering the basal differences in the characteristics of syllables emitted by pups of the C57Bl/6 and Balb/c strains used as a background in the two models, we suggest that the above spectral-temporal parameters start frequency, bandwidth, and duration are the most sensitive USV features that may represent developmental changes in ASD models.
34880473|a|
34880445|a|BACKGROUND: Infants born <30 weeks postmenstrual age (PMA) are at increased risk for neurodevelopmental impairment by age 2. Prior studies report rates of impairment for individual outcomes separately. Our objective was to describe neurodevelopmental profiles of children born <30 weeks PMA, using cognitive, language, motor, and behavioral characteristics. METHODS: We studied 587 children from a multi-center study of infants born <30 weeks PMA. Age 2 outcomes included Bayley-III subscale scores, Child Behavior Checklist syndrome scores, diagnosis of cerebral palsy (CP), and positive screen for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) risk. We used latent profile analysis (LPA) to group children into mutually exclusive profiles. RESULTS: We found four discrete neurodevelopmental profiles indicating distinct combinations of developmental and behavioral outcomes. Two of the profiles included 72.7% of the sample with most having Bayley scores within the normal range. The other two profiles included the remaining 27.3% of the sample with most having Bayley scores outside of the normal range. Only one profile (11% of sample) was comprised of children with elevated behavioral problems. CONCLUSION: Child-centered analysis techniques could facilitate the development of targeted intervention strategies and provide caregivers and practitioners with an integrative understanding of child behavior. IMPACT: Most studies examining neurodevelopmental outcomes in very preterm children report rates of impairment for individual outcomes separately. Comprehensive, "child-centered" approaches that integrate across multiple domains can be used to identify subgroups of children who experience different types of neurodevelopmental impairments. We identified four discrete neurodevelopmental profiles indicating distinct combinations of developmental and behavioral outcomes in very preterm children at 24 months. "Child-centered" analysis techniques may provide clinically useful information and could facilitate the development of targeted intervention strategies for high-risk children.
34880387|a|
34880277|a|Mental health problems and suicide are more frequent in autistic adults than general population. Dog ownership can improve human well-being. This study aimed to generate a framework of well-being outcomes for dog-related activities in autistic adults and compare it to the framework generated for a general adult population. Thirty-six autistic dog owners (18-74 years old, 18 males) from diverse UK regions were interviewed and transcripts thematically analysed. 16.7% reported that their dogs prevented them from taking their own lives, mainly due to the dog's affection and the need to care for the animal. Close dog-owner interactions (e.g., cuddling, walking, dog's presence) were the most frequent activities improving emotions/moods and life functioning, whereas routine-like activities (e.g., feeding the animal) particularly enhanced life functioning. Well-being worsening was mainly linked to dog behaviour problems, dog poor health/death and obligations to the dog. Despite some negatives associated with ownership, having a dog could improve the well-being of many autistic adults and assist suicide prevention strategies in this high-risk group. The framework was consistent with that generated previously, indicating its robustness and the potential opportunity to focus on dog-related activities rather than the vague concept of "ownership" when considering the impact of ownership on well-being.
34880244|a|
34879283|a|Deleterious genetic variants in POGZ, which encodes the chromatin regulator Pogo Transposable Element with ZNF Domain protein, are strongly associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Although it is a high-confidence ASD risk gene, the neurodevelopmental functions of POGZ remain unclear. Here we reveal the genomic binding of POGZ in the developing forebrain at euchromatic loci and gene regulatory elements (REs). We profile chromatin accessibility and gene expression in Pogz-/- mice and show that POGZ promotes the active chromatin state and transcription of clustered synaptic genes. We further demonstrate that POGZ forms a nuclear complex and co-occupies loci with ADNP, another high-confidence ASD risk gene, and provide evidence that POGZ regulates other neurodevelopmental disorder risk genes as well. Our results reveal a neurodevelopmental function of an ASD risk gene and identify molecular targets that may elucidate its function in ASD.
34879276|a|Ongoing inchworm-like CAG and CGG repeat expansions in brains, arising by aberrant processing of slipped DNAs, may drive Huntington's disease, fragile X syndrome, and autism. FAN1 nuclease modifies hyper-expansion rates by unknown means. We show that FAN1, through iterative cycles, binds, dimerizes, and cleaves slipped DNAs, yielding striking exo-nuclease pauses along slip-outs: 5'-C A GC A G-3' and 5'-C T G C T G-3'. CAG excision is slower than CTG and requires intra-strand A A and T T mismatches. Fully paired hairpins arrested excision, whereas disease-delaying CAA interruptions further slowed excision. Endo-nucleolytic cleavage is insensitive to slip-outs. Rare FAN1 variants are found in individuals with autism with CGG/CCG expansions, and CGG/CCG slip-outs show exo-nuclease pauses. The slip-out-specific ligand, naphthyridine-azaquinolone, which induces contractions of expanded repeats in vivo, requires FAN1 for its effect, and protects slip-outs from FAN1 exo-, but not endo-, nucleolytic digestion. FAN1's inchworm pausing of slip-out excision rates is well suited to modify inchworm expansion rates, which modify disease onset and progression.
34879238|a|Research exploring the links between the microbiome and autism has inadequately considered the contribution of diet diversity. Recently in Cell, Yap et al. addressed the contribution of restrictive dietary patterns to microbiome diversity in autism and found that decreased dietary diversity shapes the microbiome more than previously appreciated.
34879222|a|Children with autism spectrum disorders often display dysregulated immune responses and related gastrointestinal symptoms. However, the underlying mechanisms leading to the development of both phenotypes have not been elucidated. Here, we show that mouse offspring exhibiting autism-like phenotypes due to prenatal exposure to maternal inflammation were more susceptible to developing intestinal inflammation following challenges later in life. In contrast to its prenatal role in neurodevelopmental phenotypes, interleukin-17A (IL-17A) generated immune-primed phenotypes in offspring through changes in the maternal gut microbiota that led to postnatal alterations in the chromatin landscape of naive CD4+ T cells. The transfer of stool samples from pregnant mice with enhanced IL-17A responses into germ-free dams produced immune-primed phenotypes in offspring. Our study provides mechanistic insights into why children exposed to heightened inflammation in the womb might have an increased risk of developing inflammatory diseases in addition to neurodevelopmental disorders.
34879184|a|Objectives. The balance between DNA methylation and demethylation is crucial for the brain development. Therefore, alterations in the expression of enzymes controlling DNA methylation patterns may contribute to the etiology of neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism. SH3 and multiple ankyrin repeat domains 3 (Shank3)-deficient mice are commonly used as a well-characterized transgenic model to investigate the molecular mechanisms of autistic symptoms. DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs), which modulate several cellular processes in neurodevelopment, are implicated in the pathophysiology of autism. In this study, we aimed to describe the gene expression changes of major Dnmts in the brain of Shank3-deficient mice during early development. Methods and Results. The Dnmts gene expression was analyzed by qPCR in 5-day-old homo-zygous Shank3-deficient mice. We found significantly lower Dnmt1 and Dnmt3b gene expression levels in the frontal cortex. However, no such changes were observed in the hippocampus. However, significant increase was observed in the expression of Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b genes in the hypothalamus of Shank3-deficient mice. Conclusions. The present data indicate that abnormalities in the Shank3 gene are accompanied by an altered expression of DNA methylation enzymes in the early brain development stages, therefore, specific epigenetic control mechanisms in autism-relevant models should be more extensively investigated.
34878998|a|BACKGROUND: Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) often exhibit difficulties in social and communication skills. For more than 30 years, specialists, parents, and caregivers have used techniques, such as applied behavioral analysis, augmentative and alternative communication, and the picture exchange communication system to support the social and communication skills of people with ASD. Even though there are many techniques devised to enhance communication, these techniques are not considered in existing social media apps for people with ASD. OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the effect of adding accessibility features, such as text-to-speech (TTS), speech-to-text (STT), and communication symbols (CS), to a messaging app (MAAN). We hypothesized that these accessibility features can enhance the social and communication skills of adults with ASD. We also hypothesized that usage of this app can reduce social loneliness in adults with ASD. METHODS: Semistructured interviews were conducted with 5 experts working in fields related to ASD to help design the app. Seven adults with ASD participated in the study for a period of 10 to 16 weeks. Data logs of participants' interactions with the app were collected. Additionally, 6 participants' parents and 1 caregiver were asked to complete a short version of the Social and Emotional Loneliness Scale for Adults (SELSA-S) questionnaire to compare pre-post study results. The Mobile Application Rating Scale: user version questionnaire was also used to evaluate the app's usability. Following the study, interviews were conducted with participants to discuss their experiences with the app. RESULTS: The SELSA-S questionnaire results showed no change in the family subscale; however, the social loneliness subscale showed a difference between prestudy and poststudy. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test indicated that poststudy SELSA-S results were statistically significantly higher than prestudy results (z=-2.047; P=.04). Point-biserial correlation indicated that the SELSA-S rate of change was strongly related to usage of the TTS feature (r=0.708; P=.04) and CS feature (r=-0.917; P=.002), and moderately related to usage of the STT feature (r=0.428; P=.17). Lastly, we adopted grounded theory to analyze the interview data, and the following 5 categories emerged: app support, feature relevance, user interface design, overall feedback, and recommendations. CONCLUSIONS: This study discusses the potential for improving the communication skills of adults with ASD through special features in mobile messaging apps. The developed app aims to support the inclusion and independent life of adults with ASD. The study results showed the importance of using TTS, STT, and CS features to enhance social and communication skills, as well as reduce social loneliness in adults with ASD.
34878347|a|INTRODUCTION: Transcranial magnetic stimulation(TMS) uses magnetic pulses to induce electrical current in the underlying neuronal tissue. A variety of TMS coils exists on the market, differing primarily based on the configuration, orientation, and flexibility of the wire windings of the coil. Deep TMS utilized H-coils, which are flexible coils with different configurations aimed to stimulate different brain regions implicated in different neuropsychiatric disorders. The H7-coil, designed to target primarily the medial prefrontal cortex(mPFC) and anterior cingulate cortex(ACC), is FDA-cleared for obsessive-compulsive disorder(OCD). It was chosen as the focus of this review since it has recently shown promise in various neuropsychiatric populations in addition to a growing understanding of its mechanism of action(MOA). AREAS COVERED: Here we assembled all peer-reviewed publications on the H7-coil to showcase its efficacy in: (a) various OCD patient populations (e.g., different degrees of symptom severity, treatment resistance, comorbidities) (b) other neuropsychiatric populations (e.g., addiction, major depressive disorder(MDD), and autism spectrum disorder(ASD)). EXPERT OPINION: While substantial evidence pertaining to the H7-coil's efficacy as well as its MOA has accumulated, much work still remains. In the final section of this review, we highlight areas of ongoing and future research that will further elucidate the coil's MOA as well as its full efficacy potential.
34878228|a|
34878023|a|OBJECTIVE: To describe, in the mothers' perception, the experiences lived by families in the care of children with autism spectrum disorder. METHOD: Qualitative study, carried out with 20 mothers of children diagnosed with autistic disorder accompanied by an institution in Teresina-Piaui, Brazil. Semi-structured interviews were conducted between February and March 2019 and subjected to content analysis. RESULTS: Five central ideas related to the stages experienced by family members after the diagnosis were identified, ranging from denial to acceptance. Family members and caregivers experience feelings of sadness and mourning for the discovery of the impossibility of curing the syndrome, revealing the need for care for this family. The search for help and adaptations of the routine are constant experiences. CONCLUSION: Caring for children who live with autistic disorder involves learning ranging from structural to emotional aspects, such as dealing with limitations and impossibility of cure, pointing out to the need for family care.
34877788|a|Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a spectrum disorder due to variants in genes of the cohesin protein complex. The following abstracts are from the Cornelia de Lange Syndrome Scientific and Educational Symposium held virtually in October 2020. Aspects of behavior, including autistic features, impulsivity, adaptive skills, executive function, and anxiety are described. Applied behavioral analysis is a promising approach for autism, and an N-acetylcysteine trial is proposed. Children below 6 years with CdLS have an increased number of and further travel to medical providers, with insurance type comprising a significant barrier. Speech, language, and feeding abilities fall significantly below expectations for age in CdLS. Augmentative alternative communication can yield potential barriers as well as interesting benefits. Developmentally, studies in animal models further elucidate the mechanisms and roles of cohesin: link with mediator transcriptional complex; facilitation of enhancer-promoter communication; regulation of gene expression; allocation of cells to germ layers; and repair of spontaneous DNA damage in placental cells. Genome and RNA sequencing can help identify the molecular cause in the 20% of individuals with suspected CdLS and negative testing. The phenotypes in individuals with variants in the SMC1A gene are distinct, and that with intractable seizures has been further evaluated. AMA CME credits provided by GBMC, Baltimore, MD. All studies approved by an ethics committee.
34877642|a|INTRODUCTION: The KCNB1 gene encodes a voltage-dependent potassium channel that regulates transmembrane currents in pyramidal neurons. Heterozygous variants have recently been associated with early-onset epileptic encephalopathies and intellectual disability, but their clinical characterisation has not yet been fully defined. AIM: To describe the clinical spectrum associated with variants of KCNB1 in paediatric patients. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Retrospective study of four patients from three families with KCNB1 encephalopathy, including an analysis of the clinical and electroencephalographic features of epilepsy, associated neurological manifestations and neurodevelopmental pattern. RESULTS: In two of them, the mutation in KCNB1 was de novo; the other two, who were sisters, inherited the variant from a parent with germline mosaicism. All had mild-to-moderate intellectual disability, two patients had autistic spectrum disorder and two had attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Only case 2 displayed alterations in the MRI brain scan: progressive cortical atrophy. Three of them developed epilepsy (cases 1-3). Case 1: onset at 9.5 months with West syndrome that was well controlled with vigabatrine and zonisamide. Case 2: onset at 13 months with West syndrome, evolutionary development of polymorphic seizures (atonic, hypermotor, dysautonomic and tonic) that were refractory to 10 antiepileptic drugs and corticosteroids. Accompanied by a movement disorder characterised by ataxia, dyskinesias and tremor. Case 3: onset at 14.5 years with atonic seizures, multifocal EEG pattern and adequate control with levetiracetam. CONCLUSIONS: KCNB1 encephalopathy has a heterogeneous natural history, mainly with respect to epilepsy, ranging from patients with refractory epilepsy to patients without any epileptic seizures. All had neurodevelopmental disorders, such as intellectual disability or autism spectrum disorder, independent of epilepsy.
34877601|a|BACKGROUND: Adults born preterm (<37 weeks) have lower educational attainment than those born term. Whether this relationship is modified by family factors such as socioeconomic background is, however, less well known. We investigated whether the relationship between gestational age and educational attainment in adulthood differed according to parents' educational level in 4 Nordic countries. METHODS: This register-based cohort study included singletons born alive from 1987 up to 1992 in Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden. In each study population, we investigated effect modification by parents' educational level (low, intermediate, high) on the association between gestational age at birth (25-44 completed weeks) and low educational attainment at 25 years (not having completed upper secondary education) using general estimation equations logistic regressions. RESULTS: A total of 4.3%, 4.0%, 4.8%, and 5.0% singletons were born preterm in the Danish (n = 331 448), Finnish (n = 220 095), Norwegian (n = 292 840), and Swedish (n = 513 975) populations, respectively. In all countries, both lower gestational age and lower parental educational level contributed additively to low educational attainment. For example, in Denmark, the relative risk of low educational attainment was 1.84 (95% confidence interval 1.44 to 2.26) in adults born at 28 to 31 weeks whose parents had high educational level and 5.25 (95% confidence interval 4.53 to 6.02) in adults born at 28 to 31 weeks whose parents had low educational level, compared with a reference group born at 39 to 41 weeks with high parental educational level. CONCLUSIONS: Although higher parental education level was associated with higher educational attainment for all gestational ages, parental education did not mitigate the educational disadvantages of shorter gestational age.
34877571|a|It is extremely important to understand the causes of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) which is a neurodevelopmental disease. Treatment and lifelong support of autism are also important to improve the patient's life quality. In this article, several findings were explained to understand the possible causes of ASD. We draw, outline, and describe ASD and its relation with the epigenetic mechanisms. Here, we discuss, several different factors leading to ASD such as environmental, epigenetic, and genetic factors.
34877407|a|Background and Objectives: To investigate the pathogenicity of 2 novel KDM5C variations, report the clinical and neuroimaging findings, and review the available literature. Methods: Physical examinations, structural neuroimaging studies, and exome sequence analysis were performed. KDM5C constructs were used to study the effect of the variations in transfected cells. Results: We identified 2 novel variations c.2233C>G and c.3392_3393delAG in the KDM5C gene harboring from 2 Chinese families with X-linked intellectual disability (ID). The affected male patients exhibited severe ID, short stature, and facial dysmorphism. The 1 with c.3392_3393delAG additionally had epilepsy and autistic spectrum disorder (ASD). Transiently transfected mutant KDM5C constructs both reduced protein expression and stability and decreased histone demethylase activities in cells. Reviewing the available literature, we found that the associated ASD tended to occur in patients with variations near the C-terminus of KDM5C. Discussion: We report the clinical, molecular genetic, and pathologic features in patients with novel variations of KDM5C. The variability of the clinical phenotype in addition to an ID may associate with altered particular parts of KDM5C.
34877386|a|The research on strain-, sex-, and stress-specific differences in structural and functional connectivity of the brain is important for elucidating various behavioral features and etiologies of psychiatric disorders. Socially impaired BTBR mice are considered a model of autism spectrum disorders. Here we present high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging data from the brain of 89 adolescent mice (C57BL/6J and BTBR) in axial, sagittal, and coronal views. The study [1] includes both females and males differed in early-life experience (normally reared or subjected to prolonged maternal separation: 3 h daily from postnatal day 2 to 15). The MRI data were obtained on a horizontal tomograph Biospec 117/16 instrument with a magnetic field strength of 11.7 T. Thus, multislice Turbo RARE T2-weighted images of the brain were captured in eight groups of mice. Altogether, these data allow to evaluate strain-, sex-, and stress-specific alterations in the volumes of various brain structures and to better understand the relation between brain structural differences and behavioral abnormalities.
34877376|a|Experiments employing the Phenotype Mammalian Microarray (PM-M) technology were performed on lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) from individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and age-matched controls. We used the custom-made PM-M plate designed to assess differential utilization of the amino acid tryptophan. Multiple parameters such as the sample size, incubation time, and cell concentration have been tested, leading to optimized protocols and minimized background noise by variable selection while controlling for false discoveries. The assay generated data based on the production of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) in the presence of different compounds containing tryptophan and showed clear differences between ASD and control samples.
34877042|a|This paper was written prompted by a poignant film about adolescent girl with schizophrenia who babysits for a younger girl in an isolated cabin. Schizophrenia is an illness that both authors are fascinated with and that they continue to study and investigate. There is now compelling evidence that schizophrenia is a very complex syndrome that involves numerous neural pathways in the brain, far more than just dopaminergic and serotonergic systems. One of the more popular theories in recent literature is that it represents a hypo glutaminergic deficiency of certain pathways, including thalamic ones. After much review of research and study in this area, we have concluded that most such theories contain a number of shortcomings. Most are based on clinical responses to certain drugs, particularly antipsychotic drugs affecting the dopaminergic neurotransmitters; thus, assuming dopamine release was the central cause of the psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia. The theory was limited in that dopamine excess could only explain the positive symptoms of the disorder. Antipsychotic medications have minimal effectiveness for the negative and cognitive symptoms associated with schizophrenia. It has been estimated that 20-30% of patients show either a partial or no response to antipsychotic medications. In addition, the dopamine hypothesis does not explain the neuroanatomic findings in schizophrenia.
34876798|a|In recent years, many psycho-educational technologies were studied to address the school-related difficulties encountered by students with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, most of them remain individual-centered and do not consider the social environment. To fill this gap, this study reports on the user-centered design of a web-based support tool, which aims to support communication and coordination between parents, school staff and health professionals of middle and high school students with ASD, in the context of elaborating, implementing, and following an Individualized Education Plan. The study followed a two-step design process: (1) a need analysis for identifying information domains deemed important by the stakeholders; (2) through a participative iterative design process, a panel of professionals and parents provided ideas and feedbacks on the design, which was integrated in subsequent prototype versions of the "ToGather" app. Supplementary Information: The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s11423-021-10073-w.
34876316|a|BACKGROUND: Wilms' tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and mental retardation (WAGR) syndrome is a contiguous gene deletion syndrome caused by a de novo deletion including the 11p13 region. Although autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is frequently observed in patients with WAGR syndrome, few reports have comprehensively described its characteristics. We herein present the detailed neuropsychological and neurophysiological findings of a patient with WAGR syndrome complicated with severe psychomotor developmental delay and ASD. CASE PRESENTATION: The patient is presently a 6-year-old boy. Microarray analysis revealed a 7.1 Mb loss at 11p14.3-p13 and a 9.3 Mb loss at 11p13-p12, which encompassed the PAX6, WT1, and PRRG4 genes. His behavioral features were characteristic even among the ASD population: severe hypoesthesia to touch, pain, and temperature in addition to remarkable sensory seeking posing a high risk of serious accident. Sensory Profile analysis objectively identified a strong preference for sensory stimulation. Furthermore, his somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP) showed a mild delay in central conduction time, suggesting partial brain stem dysfunction-induced hypoalgesia. DISCUSSION: This first attempt to characterize sensory dysfunction using Sensory Profile and SSEP in WAGR syndrome may contribute to understanding its neuropsychological features and improve the quality of rehabilitation and socioeducational support in affected children.
34876014|a|BACKGROUND: Nutritional factors have been identified as preventable risk factors for cardiovascular disease; this study aimed to investigate the application of the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) in nutritional behaviors related to cardiovascular diseases among the women in Fasa city, Fars province, Iran. METHODS: The study was conducted in two stages. First, the factors affecting nutritional behaviors associated with cardiovascular disease on 350 women who were referred to Fasa urban health centers were determined based on the TPB. In the second stage, based on the results of a cross-sectional study, quasi-expeimental study was performed on 200 women covered by Fasa health centers. The questionnaire used for the study was a questionnaire based on TPB. The questionnaire was completed by the experimental and control groups before and three months after the intervention. Data were analyzed by SPSS software using logistic regression, paired t-test, independent sample t-test, and chi-square test. The level of significance is considered 0.05. RESULT: The constructs of attitude, subjective norms, and perceived behavioral control (PBC) were predictors of nutritional behaviors associated with cardiovascular disease in women. The constructs predicted 41.6% of the behavior. The results showed that mean scores of attitude, subjective norms, PBC, intention, nutritional performance related to the cardiovascular disease before intervention were, respectively, 24.32, 14.20, 18.10, 13.37 and 16.28, and after the intervention, were, respectively, 42.32, 25.40, 33.72, 30.13 and 41.38. All the constructs except the attitude in the intervention group were significantly higher (p < 0.001) than the control group. CONCLUSION: The results of the present study showed that the educational intervention based on the TPB would be consider an effective educational and promotinal strategy for the nutritional behaviors to prevent cardiovascular disease in women. Considering the role of mothers in providing family food baskets and the effect of their nutritional behaviors on family members, the education of this group can promote healthy eating behaviors in the community and family.
34875883|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Although most children with autism and other neurodevelopmental disorders live in low- and middle-income countries, reliable tools to assess these conditions are often not available in these settings. In this study, we adapted two questionnaires developed in Western high-income contexts for use in Ethiopia - the Autism Treatment Evaluation Checklist and the Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory  Family Impact Module. Both measures are completed by a child's caregiver and both are relatively short and easy to complete. The Autism Treatment Evaluation Checklist is used to monitor the developmental issues of the child, while the Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory  Family Impact Module measures the impact of the child's condition on the caregiver. We translated both tools into the Ethiopian language Amharic, and adapted them to the local cultural context. Three hundred caregivers, half of whom were parents of children with neurodevelopmental disorders, and half were parents of children with physical health problems, completed the questionnaires through a face-to face interview, so that non-literate caregivers could also take part. Both tools performed adequately, measured what we aimed to measure and were reliable. Both the Autism Treatment Evaluation Checklist and Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory  are suitable tools to assess children with developmental and other health problems in Ethiopia and their caregivers. We believe that more similar tools should be developed or adapted for use in low-income countries like Ethiopia, to gain a better understanding of developmental problems in those settings, and allowing clinicians and service providers to use these tools in their practice. Moreover, these tools can be used in future studies to evaluate interventions to improve support for families.
34875687|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and schizophrenia (SZ) are separate clinical entities but share deficits in social-emotional processing and static neural functional connectivity patterns. We compared patients' dynamic functional network connectivity (dFNC) state engagement with typically developed (TD) individuals during social-emotional processing after initially characterizing such dynamics in TD. Young adults diagnosed with ASD (n = 42), SZ (n = 41), or TD (n = 55) completed three functional MRI runs, viewing social-emotional videos with happy, sad, or neutral content. We examined dFNC of 53 spatially independent networks extracted using independent component analysis and applied k-means clustering to windowed dFNC matrices, identifying four unique whole-brain dFNC states. TD showed differential engagement (fractional time, mean dwell time) in three states as a function of emotion. During Happy videos, patients spent less time than TD in a happy-associated state and instead spent more time in the most weakly connected state. During Sad videos, only ASD spent more time than TD in a sad-associated state. Additionally, only ASD showed a significant relationship between dFNC measures and alexithymia and social-emotional recognition task scores, potentially indicating different neural processing of emotions in ASD and SZ. Our results highlight the importance of examining temporal whole-brain reconfiguration of FNC, indicating engagement in unique emotion-specific dFNC states.
34874671|a|A notable phenomenon in the field of medical literature devoted to the brain of the developing child was the work of Professor I.A. Skvortsova, a well-known scientist with more than half a century of experience in teaching and research.
34874432|a|
34874191|a|Introduction: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of neurodevelopmental conditions that impact behavior, communication, social interaction, and learning abilities. Treatment of ASD with medical cannabis (MC) shows promising results in reducing the severity of certain behavioral aspects. The goals of this observational study are to demonstrate the potential of metabolic biomarkers to (1) objectively determine the impact on metabolites of MC treatment and (2) suggest the metabolic pathways of children with ASD, who respond to MC treatment. Materials and Methods: The impact of effective physician-supervised MC treatment on children with ASD (n=15), compared with an age-matched group of typically developing (TD; n=9) children, was evaluated in an observational study design. Each child followed a unique MC regimen determined by their specific response over at least 1 year of treatment, which included the following: tetrahydrocannabinol-dominant MC (dosing range 0.05-50 mg per dose) in 40% of children and cannabidiol-dominant MC (dosing range 7.5-200 mg per dose) in 60% of children. Samples from the ASD group collected pre-MC treatment and at time of maximal impact, and from the TD group, were subjected to salivary metabolomics analysis. Ten minutes before saliva sampling, parents filled out behavioral rating surveys. Results: Sixty-five potential cannabis-responsive biomarkers exhibiting a shift toward the TD physiological levels were identified in children with ASD after MC treatment. For each biomarker, the physiological levels were determined based on the values detected in the TD group. A similar qualitative improvement trend in children with ASD treated with MC was also observed in the behavioral surveys. Twenty-three potential Cannabis-Responsive biomarkers exhibiting change toward TD mean were categorized as anti-inflammatory, bioenergy associated, neurotransmitters, amino acids, and endocannabinoids. The changes in the levels of the Cannabis-Responsive biomarkers N-acetylaspartic acid, spermine, and dehydroisoandrosterone 3-sulfate have been previously linked to behavioral symptoms commonly observed in individuals with ASD. Conclusions: Our results suggest Cannabis-Responsive biomarkers shift toward the TD mean after MC treatment and can potentially quantify benefit at the metabolic level. These changes appear to be similar to the trend described in behavior surveys. Larger trials are needed to confirm these preliminary findings.
34874130|a|Population-based studies employing standardized diagnostics are needed to determine the burden of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in low-resource settings. A community-based study was conducted among 8-11 year old children in rural, northwestern Bangladesh to establish the prevalence of ASD. A standardized screening and diagnosis protocol was adapted and deployed comprising the social communication questionnaire (SCQ), and the autism diagnostic observation schedule 2, (ADOS-2), and the autism diagnostic interview, revised (ADI-R), respectively. A year-long research training was conducted for a clinical psychologist to be certified to administer ADOS-2 and ADI-R. Over 8000 children were visited at home and administered the SCQ leading to some, based on their score, being further evaluated using the ADOS-2 and ADI-R by the clinical psychologist. Based on ADOS-2 applying the diagnoses of autism or autism spectrum, the prevalence was 40 (95% CI: 27, 54) per 10,000. Autistic disorder using ADI-R was found at 12 (95% CI: 5, 20) per 10,000. Boys were at a higher risk than girls with the rates among boys being 46 (95% CI: 25, 67) using ADOS-2 and 19 (95% CI:6, 33) using ADI-R. Among girls the rates were 34 (95% CI:16, 52) and 5 (95% CI:0, 12) per 10,000, respectively. Challenges to undertaking ASD research in a rural South Asian context are discussed. There was a low-to-moderate prevalence of ASD in a rural, child population in Bangladesh. Future research is needed to estimate rates of ASD and its causes and socioeconomic consequences in rural and urban settings of South Asia.
34874093|a|SCN2A (sodium channel 2A) encodes the Nav1.2 channel protein in excitatory neurons in the brain. Nav1.2 is a critical voltage-gated sodium channel of the central nervous system. Mutations in SCN2A are responsible for a broad phenotypic spectrum ranging from autism and developmental delay to severe encephalopathy with neonatal or early infantile onset. SCN2A can be spliced into two different isoforms, a neonatal (6N) and an adult (6A) form. After birth, there is an equal or higher amount of the 6N isoform, protecting the brain from the increased neuronal excitability of the infantile brain. During postnatal development, 6N is gradually replaced by 6A. In an infant carrying the novel SCN2A mutation c.643G > A (p.Ala215Thr) only in the neonatal transcript, seizures started immediately after birth. The clinical presentation evolved from a burst-suppression pattern with 30-50 tonic seizures per day to hypsarrhythmia. The first exome analysis, focusing only on common transcripts, missed the diagnosis and delayed early therapy. A reevaluation including all transcripts revealed the SCN2A variant.
34874058|a|OBJECTIVE: Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is one of the most prevalent childhood disorders, affecting around 3.4% of children worldwide. A common and impairing correlate of ADHD is aggressive behaviour. ADHD symptoms and aggression are both heterogeneous and it has been speculated that certain symptoms of ADHD might be more important in aggressive behaviours of different types than others. This study uses a symptom-level analysis to investigate the concurrent and temporal links between ADHD symptoms and aggressive behaviours. METHODS: Using Gaussian Graphical Models and Graphical Vector Autoregression Models, longitudinal and cross-sectional networks of ADHD symptoms and aggressive behaviours, measured using parent-reported Social Behaviour Questionnaires, were estimated. Participants included 1,246 children taking part in the longitudinal Swiss z-proso cohort study at ages 7, 9 and 11. RESULTS: The longitudinal network highlighted that ADHD symptoms and aggressive behaviours share a multitude of reciprocal temporal relations, with inattentive ADHD symptoms preceding both reactive and proactive aggression. Cross-sectional networks suggested that hyperactive/impulsive symptoms were predominantly connected to reactive aggressive behaviours but also to a form of proactive aggression, namely dominating other children. CONCLUSION: Findings provide preliminary evidence which specific symptoms are the most promising targets for reducing aggressive behaviours in children with ADHD. They also highlight the potential importance of targeting feedback loops resulting from aggressive behaviours. Future research is needed to better understand the mechanisms through which ADHD and aggressive behaviours become linked.
34873387|a|Recent surveillance efforts indicate that 1 in 54 American children meet the criteria for Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), making it the fastest growing neurodevelopmental disorder in the U.S. Despite evidence that ASD can be reliably diagnosed as early as 24 months, the median age at ASD diagnosis in 2016 in the U.S. was 51 months. The CLEAR Autism Diagnostic Evaluation (CADE; Willard & Kroncke, 2019), was developed in response to the need to improve, shorten, and standardize the clinical ASD evaluation process. The CADE is a 33-item rating scale designed to be completed by caregivers and clinicians. The current study was conducted to examine the reliability and validity of the CADE using a sample of 191 individuals who received a private evaluation for ASD. Using the client's evaluation records, clinicians completed the CADE items. The coefficient alpha was .94, which indicates that the items form a scale that has high internal consistency. The CADE total scores were highly correlated with ADOS scores, with r values ranging from .52-.86, and discriminated between those participants with a diagnosis of ASD and those without (p < .001). Receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve analyses indicated excellent diagnostic accuracy of the CADE total score (ROC area under the curve = .998). Results suggest that the CADE can be used as an efficient and accurate means of evaluating ASD. Limitations and implications for use of the CADE are discussed.
34873263|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are neurodevelopmental disorders, that are characterized by core symptoms, such as alterations of social communication and restrictive or repetitive behavior. The etiology and pathophysiology of disease is still unknown, however, there is a strong interaction between genetic and environmental factors. An intriguing point in autism research is identification the vulnerable time periods of brain development that lack compensatory homeostatic corrections. Valproic acid (VPA) is an antiepileptic drug with a pronounced teratogenic effect associated with a high risk of ASD, and its administration to rats during the gestation is used for autism modeling. It has been hypothesized that valproate induced damage and functional alterations of autism target structures may occur and evolve during early postnatal life. Here, we used prenatal and postnatal administrations of VPA to investigate the main behavioral features which are associated with autism spectrum disorders core symptoms were tested in early juvenile and adult rats. Neuroanatomical lesion of autism target structures and electrophysiological studies in specific neural circuits. Our results showed that prenatal and early postnatal administration of valproate led to the behavioral alterations that were similar to ASD. Postnatally treated group showed tendency to normalize in adulthood. We found pronounced structural changes in the brain target regions of prenatally VPA-treated groups, and an absence of abnormalities in postnatally VPA-treated groups, which confirmed the different severity of VPA across different stages of brain development. The results of this study clearly show time dependent effect of VPA on neurodevelopment, which might be explained by temporal differences of brain regions' development process. Presumably, postnatal administration of valproate leads to the dysfunction of synaptic networks that is recovered during the lifespan, due to the brain plasticity and compensatory ability of circuit refinement. Therefore, investigations of compensatory homeostatic mechanisms activated after VPA administration and directed to eliminate the defects in postnatal brain, may elucidate strategies to improve the course of disease.
34873203|a|Despite the increased use of medical cannabinoids, the efficacy and safety of the treatment among children remain uncertain. The objective was to study the efficacy and safety of medical cannabinoids in children. The search included studies through 11-May-2020. Selection criteria included studies evaluating efficacy and safety outcomes of medical cannabinoids (tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and other cannabis derivatives) versus control in children, independently assessed by two reviewers. Eight studies were included, all of which are randomized controlled trials. Cannabidiol is associated with 50% reduction in seizures rate (Relative Risk (RR) = 1.69, 95% CI [1.20-2.36]) and caregiver global impression of change (Median Estimated difference = (- 1), 95%CI [- 1.39-(- 0.60)]) in Dravet syndrome, compared to placebo. While cannabidiol was associated with a reduction in reported seizure events (RR = 0.59, 95% CI [0.36-0.97]), no association was found in products contained also tetrahydrocannabinol (RR = 1.35, 95% CI [0.46-4.03]). Higher dose of cannabidiol was associated with decreased appetite (RR = 2.40, 95% CI [1.39-4.15]). A qualitative assessment suggests that medical cannabinoids might be associated with adverse mental events. In conclusion, cannabidiol is associated with clinical improvement in Dravet syndrome. However, cannabidiol is also associated with decreased appetite. Adverse mental events were reported as well, however, more research should be performed to assess well this outcome.
34873147|a|Individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) exhibit atypical sensory characteristics, impaired social skills, deficits in verbal and nonverbal communication, and restricted and repetitive behaviors. The relationship between sensory characteristics and brain morphological changes in ASD remains unclear. In this study, we investigated the association between brain morphological changes and sensory characteristics in individuals with ASD using brain image analysis and a sensory profile test. Forty-three adults with ASD and 84 adults with typical development underwent brain image analysis using FreeSurfer. The brain cortex was divided into 64 regions, and the cortical thickness and volume of the limbic system were calculated. The sensory characteristics of the participants were evaluated using the Adolescent/Adult Sensory Profile (AASP). Correlation analysis was performed for cortical thickness, limbic area volume, and AASP scores. In the ASD group, there was a significant positive correlation between visual sensory sensitivity scores and the right lingual cortical thickness (r = 0.500). There were also significant negative correlations between visual sensation avoiding scores and the right lateral orbitofrontal cortical thickness (r = -0.513), taste/smell sensation avoiding scores and the right hippocampal volume (r = -0.510), and taste/smell sensation avoiding scores and the left hippocampal volume (r = -0.540). The study identified associations among the lingual cortical thickness, lateral orbitofrontal cortical thickness, and hippocampal volume and sensory characteristics. These findings suggest that brain morphological changes may trigger sensory symptoms in adults with ASD.
34873110|a|OBJECTIVES: Dysfunctions in the basal ganglia have been repeatedly found in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The nucleus accumbens (NAcc) is known for its central role in social functions and also in its abnormality in ASD. In this study, whole-brain functional connectivity of the NAcc was examined to isolate brain regions that are differently connected to the NAcc in autism, using resting-state functional MRI (rs-fMRI) data. METHODS: In the initial dataset, 68 individuals with ASD (13.13 +- 2.41 years old) and 77 typically developing individuals (14.79 +- 3.57 years old) were compared. RESULTS: The precuneus cortex, lingual gyrus, thalamus, dorsal striatum, anterior cingulate cortex and posterior cingulate cortex showed weaker connectivity to the NAcc in the group with ASD. Among these regions, dysconnectivity of the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) was replicated in the replication dataset, with 78 individuals with ASD and 105 without ASD. CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that the dysconnectivity between the NAcc and PCC may account for social dysfunctions in ASD.
34872440|a|Effects of testosterone withdrawal on significant correlates of pedophilic disorder (PeD) are largely unknown. The purpose of this study was to explore in detail the effects of testosterone suppression from degarelix as compared to placebo on desire, hypersexuality, and subjectively experienced sexual interest in participants with PeD.We compared the sexual effects of degarelix, a GnRH antagonist, on men with PeD assigned to degarelix (n =26) or placebo (n = 26) in a double-blind randomized clinical trial. Sexual Desire Inventory scores decreased significantly at two weeks (between-group difference p = 0.001, d = -0.96 [-0.38 to -1.55) and ten weeks (p < 0.001, d = -1.30 [-0.69 to -1.91) in participants assigned degarelix, whereas HBI ratings did not differ significantly at two weeks (p = 0.07, d = -0.52 [0.05 to -1.08) , but did so at ten weeks (p = 0.01, d = -0.72 [-0.15 to -1.29). Fifteen out of 26 (58%) individuals in the group assigned degarelix and 3 out of 26 (12%) in the group assigned to placebo reported no further sexual interest in children at ten weeks (Fisher's exact test, p < 0.0001), an effect unmodified by autistic, antisocial, or impulsive traits, age, age at onset of, or duration of pedophilic attraction.
34872240|a|OBJECTIVE: There is no study comparing schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders (ASD) in terms of caregiver burden. This study aims to compare the caregiver burden among family members of the patients with schizophrenia and ASD and investigate the predictive factors. METHODS: A cross-sectional study with the family members living with and/or providing care to their patients was carried out. A sociodemographic form, the Beck Depression Inventory, the Self-Stigma Inventory for Families, and the Zarit Caregiver Burden Scale were utilized. Regression analyses were conducted to determine the predictive factors for higher burden. RESULTS: Caregiver burden in ASD was significantly higher than in schizophrenia. Regression analysis showed that the predictors of high caregiver burden were the need for self-care (OR=3.6), self-destructive behaviors (OR=3.4), self-stigma (OR=1.1), depression (OR=1.1), and level of income (OR=1.0) for all family members. When the diagnosis was removed from the equation, the factors determining the high burden did not change. CONCLUSION: This study suggests that characteristics of the illness are stronger predictors than family members' characteristics in explaining high caregiver burden for both illnesses. Psychological, social, and economic supports should be provided for families to help alleviate their caregiving burden.
34871995|a|Autistic traits are associated with psychotic experiences in adolescence; however, the mechanisms underlying this relationship are not well understood. Prior research indicates that bullying victimization increases the risk of psychotic experiences in general adolescent populations, and autistic youth are at higher risk of being bullied than their non-autistic peers. Using longitudinal data from general population adolescents aged 10-14 in the Tokyo Teen Cohort study, we tested the hypothesis that bullying is responsible for the association between autistic traits and psychotic experiences in adolescence. We identified an indirect effect (estimate = 0.033 [95% CIs: 0.014-0.057], p < 0.001) between autistic traits and psychotic experiences via bullying victimization, even after controlling for known confounders. Prevention of bullying victimization may be one avenue for reducing risk of psychosis among adolescents with high levels of autistic traits.
34871828|a|The tendency of mothers to cradle their infant on their left side was first demonstrated by Salk back in 1960, but has been the subject of renewed interest in recent years. In this paper, I examine the different aspects of this tendency, making a short detour to explore this behavioral bias in other mammals and in nonhuman primates. The left cradling bias has been investigated not only in mothers, but also in fathers, children and students, as well as in different cultures. Moreover, the origins and causes of this behavior have been explored by examining its links to hemispheric specialization and to other motor asymmetries in mothers and infants. In recent years, researchers have also explored divergent patterns of cradling in groups of mothers exhibiting stress, anxiety, or depressive symptoms during pregnancy and after delivery, as well as in children with atypical development (e.g., autism spectrum disorder). The findings reported in the past 20 years open up promising avenues for anticipating potential difficulties in the relationship between mother and child, for given that a left cradling bias has been found in about 75% of the samples tested, cradling patterns could constitute natural behavioral markers of the socio-emotional harmony between cradler and cradled.
34871737|a|BACKGROUND: Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is a leading genetic cause of autism and intellectual disability with cortical hyperexcitability and sensory hypersensitivity attributed to loss and hypofunction of inhibitory parvalbumin-expressing (PV) cells. Our studies provide novel insights into the role of excitatory neurons in abnormal development of PV cells during a postnatal period of inhibitory circuit refinement. METHODS: To achieve Fragile X mental retardation gene (Fmr1) deletion and re-expression in excitatory neurons during the postnatal day (P)14-P21 period, we generated CreCaMKIIa/Fmr1Flox/y (cOFF) and CreCaMKIIa/Fmr1FloxNeo/y (cON) mice, respectively. Cortical phenotypes were evaluated in adult mice using biochemical, cellular, clinically relevant electroencephalogram (EEG) and behavioral tests. RESULTS: We found that similar to global Fmr1 KO mice, the density of PV-expressing cells, their activation, and sound-evoked gamma synchronization were impaired in cOFF mice, but the phenotypes were improved in cON mice. cOFF mice also showed enhanced cortical gelatinase activity and baseline EEG gamma power, which were reduced in cON mice. In addition, TrkB phosphorylation and PV levels were lower in cOFF mice, which also showed increased locomotor activity and anxiety-like behaviors. Remarkably, when FMRP levels were restored in only excitatory neurons during the P14-P21 period, TrkB phosphorylation and mouse behaviors were also improved. CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that postnatal deletion or re-expression of FMRP in excitatory neurons is sufficient to elicit or ameliorate structural and functional cortical deficits, and abnormal behaviors in mice, informing future studies about appropriate treatment windows and providing fundamental insights into the cellular mechanisms of cortical circuit dysfunction in FXS.
34871440|a|BACKGROUND: Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) tend to be selective in their food intake which may compromise their diet quality. While ASD diagnoses capture severe levels of impairment, autistic traits vary on a continuum throughout the population. Yet, little is known about how autistic traits relate to diet quality at the population level. OBJECTIVES: This study examines the association between autistic traits in early childhood and diet quality in mid-childhood and explores the mediating role of food selectivity. DESIGN: Participants were children (n = 4092) from the population-based Generation R Study. Parents reported their child's autistic traits at 1.5, 3 and 6 years, food selectivity at 4 years and food intake at 8 years from which a diet quality score was derived. Associations of autistic traits and autistic trait trajectory (identified using Latent Class Growth Modelling) with diet quality were examined using multiple linear regression models. The indirect effect of food selectivity in the association between autistic traits at 1.5 years and diet quality was examined using mediation analysis. RESULTS: : Autistic traits were associated with diet quality (e.g. 1.5 years: beta = -0.09, 95%CI: -0.13, -0.06). Two classes captured the autistic trait trajectories from 1.5 to 6 years: children with "low and stable" (95%) and "high and increasing" (5%) mean scores. Children in the high and increasing group had poorer diet quality than the low and stable group (beta = -0.28, 95%CI: -0.44, -0.11). Food selectivity mediated the association between autistic traits at 1.5 years and diet quality at 8 years (betaindirect = -0.03, 95%CI: -0.03, -0.02). CONCLUSIONS: Autistic traits in early childhood are associated with poorer diet quality in mid-childhood, and food selectivity appears to mediate this association. Interventions intended to optimize nutrition in children with elevated autistic traits may integrate behavioral strategies to support parents' responding to their child's food selectivity.
34871124|a|Purpose: Lexical stress abilities were investigated in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) compared to typically developing (TD) controls. We hypothesised that individuals with ASD would demonstrate atypical prosody on lexical and phrase stress tasks and are perceived by listeners as sounding unnatural.Method: A between-group study was conducted to investigate lexical stress abilities among adolescents (12-20 years) with ASD (n = 11) compared to TD controls (n = 11) matched for age and gender. Two tasks were administered to assess the ability to receptively and expressively distinguish nouns from verbs and a noun phrase from a compound noun. Receptive tasks required participants to select visual stimuli corresponding with the utterance they heard. Expressive tasks were rated using perceptual judgments of accuracy, perceptual and acoustic measurements of duration and perceptual ratings of "naturalness."Result: Individuals with ASD performed with significantly less accuracy on all prosody tasks, significantly longer duration of utterances, and were rated as sounding "unnatural" at a significantly higher rate than controls.Conclusion: This study provides converging evidence that supports atypical prosody is influenced by longer duration of utterances and less accurate lexical and phrase stress. The clinical implications of this study support early assessment and intervention of prosodic disorders in ASD.
34869717|a|Stakeholder involvement in research has been demonstrated to increase the effectiveness, validity, and quality of a study. This paper describes the engagement of a stakeholder panel in the development and implementation of an animal-assisted intervention (AAI) assessment and program for children diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Canines for Autism Activity and Nutrition (CAAN) aims to promote physical activity and wellness among children diagnosed with ASD by integrating activities with their pet dog during the child's ongoing Applied Behavioral Analysis (ABA) in-home therapy sessions. Feedback from stakeholders guided program development at each stage of the research process, including this publication. Utilizing a stakeholder-informed approach was essential for the development of assessment tools, program materials, and program design. Methods that may assist others to effectively partner with stakeholders to implement an AAI among children diagnosed with ASD or related disorders are described.
34868823|a|Interdisciplinary collaboration is challenging, but necessary, to meet the needs of individuals with autism spectrum disorder. Among the dyadic interactions in interdisciplinary teams, the relationships between occupational therapy practitioners and board certified behavior analysts are uniquely challenging. The disciplines define evidence-based practice differently and approach intervention from different angles. Furthermore, there are fundamental differences in worldview between the disciplines. Both disciplines offer necessary treatment, and successful collaboration between these disciplines is essential for maximizing outcomes. Hence, finding ways to help bridge the gap between these professions, in particular, is essential. Common barriers to developing collaborative alliances include misperceptions of the other discipline, differences in terminology, and unprofessional behavior. This article reviews the history and foundational concepts of both disciplines, and the common approaches associated with each. In addition, models of collaboration are discussed, with suggestions for enhancing interdisciplinary communication and treatment. Successful collaborative treatment is predicated on an understanding of the value and expertise offered by different disciplines, and requires mutual respect and professional dialogue.
34868822|a|Interprofessional collaboration has become an essential component in the treatment of individuals with autism spectrum disorder, as practitioners from a range of disciplines are often necessary to address the core features and co-occurring conditions. Theoretically, such cross-disciplinary collaboration results in superior client care and maximal outcomes by capitalizing on the unique expertise of each collaborating team member. However, conflict in collaborative practice is not uncommon given that the treatment providers come from varying educational backgrounds and may have opposing core values, fundamental goals, and overall approaches. Although the overarching interest of each of these professionals is to improve client outcomes and quality of life, they may be unequipped to effectively navigate the barriers to collaboration. This article reviews the potential benefits and misconceptions surrounding interprofessional collaboration and highlights common sources of conflict. As a proposed solution to many of the identified issues, we offer a set of standards for effective collaborative practice in the interprofessional treatment of autism spectrum disorder. These standards prioritize client care and value each discipline's education and unique contributions. They are intended to function as core standards for all treatment team members, promote unity, prevent conflict, and ultimately help practitioners achieve the most integrated collaborative practice among professionals of varying disciplines.
34868819|a|Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) often display repetitive and restrictive patterns of behavior, which can be seen in food selectivity and other feeding problems. Feeding problems in children with ASD not only lead to medical complications for the child but also can lead to increased caregiver stress. In order for behavior analysts to ensure adherence to the Professional and Ethical Compliance Code for Behavior Analysts, many factors need to be addressed prior to and during feeding assessments and interventions. The need for interdisciplinary collaboration and ethical situations that may arise are reviewed. The purpose of this article is to assist the behavior analyst in determining best practices for feeding assessments and interventions while maintaining ethical compliance.
34868816|a|Behavioral skills training (BST) has been demonstrated to be an effective method for training staff to perform skills with high fidelity in a relatively short amount of time. In the current study, three components of direct instruction (DI) were trained using BST. The participants were two classroom instructors with prior experience implementing DI with students with autism. The targets for staff training were accuracy with signal delivery, error correction, and delivery of praise. A multiple-baseline design across skills was used to evaluate the effects of BST for each participant. Generalization probes were conducted with a student with autism during baseline and after mastery with each skill was demonstrated. BST rapidly increased staff performance across skills, with generalization demonstrated during classroom probes. This study extends the use of BST to training staff to implement DI, and the results suggest that BST resulted in improved teacher performance of the targeted skills during generalization probes with students.
34868815|a|This study used an alternating treatments embedded within a nonconcurrent multiple baseline across participants design to evaluate the effects of a stability ball chair on the on-task and in-seat behavior for three children with autism in a clinic setting. Results indicated increases for both in-seat and on-task behavior with the stability ball chair compared to a standard table chair, however, results varied across participants. On-task behavior had a greater increase across participants compared to in-seat behavior with the stability ball chair. Social validity results found that therapists had an overall positive view of stability ball chairs. This study provides clinicians with options for alternative seating to increase the on-task and in-seat behavior of children with autism. This study extends the use and evaluation of alternative seating, from typically studied settings and contexts, such as classrooms, to clinic settings with younger populations.
34868813|a|Although Excel 2016 may be the most common graphing software, it is often confusing to use effectively. In the field of applied behavior analysis, graphs are crucial for analyzing data and sharing results. Multiple-baseline design graphs are one of the most popular graphs used by behavior analysts, but they often fall short of meeting established quality standards. This tutorial extends prior tutorials to provide detailed instructions on how to create a multiple-baseline design graph that not only meets quality standards but also includes phase change lines built into the graph and an acceptable x/y-axis ratio. This tutorial is applicable for both Windows and macOS platforms.
34868811|a|Echolalia is a linguistic phenomenon common in individuals with autism spectrum disorder. We examined the relationship between demand complexity and immediate echolalia in four students with an autism diagnosis in a university-based academic setting. Mastered and novel antecedent verbal demands that required an intraverbal response were systematically alternated using a multielement design to test whether participants' immediate echolalia was socially mediated. Results showed that immediate echolalia was more likely to occur during complex novel intraverbal tasks than in any other condition. Implications for function-based treatment strategies are discussed. Supplementary Information: The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s40617-020-00535-7.
34868810|a|Recent statistics indicate children of Latino background are diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) at a much later age than their non-Latino White counterparts. Once a diagnosis is made, it is critically important that families get access to evidence-based interventions, including applied behavior analysis (ABA) services. However, disadvantaging factors such as a lack of awareness of available services, poor health care access and health literacy, and language barriers may impact these families' ability to access and maintain ABA services. The purpose of this pilot study was to obtain preliminary information on the experiences of accessing and maintaining ABA services for a sample of Latino American families living in Massachusetts. We conducted structured interviews with 28 families that had a child with ASD aged 8 years or younger. Questions in the interview were related to the background and diagnostic experiences of the child; difficulties in accessing ABA services; and for those children receiving ABA services, parents' perceptions of the services. Results of the interviews are summarized, and implications for future research and service delivery are discussed.
34868809|a|Caregivers of children with an autism spectrum disorder are often responsible for assisting their children to complete activities of daily living skills. Effective and efficient caregiver training methods are needed to train caregivers. The present study used two concurrent multiple-baseline across-participants designs to evaluate the effects of real-time feedback and behavioral skills training on training eight caregivers to implement teaching procedures for activities of daily living skills with their child. We assessed caregivers' accuracy and correct implementation of the six-component teaching procedure after they received either real-time feedback or behavioral skills training. Caregivers from both groups mastered and maintained correct implementation of the teaching procedures with their child. The overall results suggest that real-time feedback and behavioral skills training are efficacious to train caregivers to implement activities of daily living skills procedures with their children, and that real-time feedback may be an efficient alternative method to train caregivers. Supplementary Information: The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s40617-020-00513-z.
34868808|a|Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are considered an at-risk population for reading delays and challenges. In recent years, there has been emerging support for the computer-assisted instruction (CAI) Headsprout with respect to reading outcomes in children with ASD. CAI, often used within classrooms, is designed using automated and carefully sequenced instruction. A randomized controlled trial was used to explore the implementation of Headsprout by parents, including a treatment package (i.e., behavioral skills training, an online support group, and a consultative model) within the home environment, with their children with ASD. A between-groups design was used to evaluate the effects of Headsprout on the reading outcomes and print motivation of a sample of 26 children with ASD. Thirteen children were in the experimental (Headsprout) group, and thirteen were in the control group receiving treatment as usual. Supplementary online supports were provided to parents based on specific learning problems identified during the intervention. Results demonstrated that participants who received Headsprout showed greater gains in reading rate, word reading, non-word reading, and target sounds and words within Headsprout than the control group. The results of print motivation demonstrated that only Headsprout-specific print material resulted in an increase in assessed preference at posttests.
34868807|a|Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) experience feeding dysfunction at a substantially higher proportion than their neurotypical peers. Feeding concerns can provide considerable challenges for parents, and as such, helping parents of children with ASD provide effective mealtime interventions for interfering behavior is critical, especially if parents have individual circumstances that affect their ability to effectively implement these feeding interventions. This study contributes to the parent-implemented feeding-intervention literature by demonstrating that a parent with ASD can implement a pediatric feeding intervention in the home with their child with ASD, despite contributing mental health factors. To address family needs, we developed a socially valid and individualized intervention, which we delivered over telehealth. The intervention resulted in an increase in the consumption of previously nonpreferred foods, while the caregiver maintained adequate levels of procedural fidelity. Practical considerations and implications are discussed.
34868805|a|There is increased recognition that women and girls with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are underserved by the clinical criteria and processes required to receive a diagnosis. This mixed-methods systematic review aimed to identify key barriers to obtaining an ASD diagnosis in girls and young women under 21 years. Six themes were identified that focused on perceived gendered symptoms, namely behavioural problems, social and communication abilities, language, relationships, additional diagnoses/difficulties and restricted and repetitive behaviours and interests. Five themes were identified as (parental) perceived barriers to diagnosis, namely compensatory behaviours, parental concerns, others' perceptions, lack of information/resources and clinician bias. This review highlights the importance of enhancing widespread understanding and recognition of ASD presentation in females across development. PROSPERO Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (ID 2018 CRD42018087235). Supplementary Information: The online version of this article (10.1007/s40489-020-00225-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
34868486|a|Background: Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) symptoms include re-experiencing, avoidance, hyperarousal, and cognitive deficits, reflecting both emotional and cognitive dysregulation. In recent years, non-pharmacological approaches and specifically animal-assisted therapy have been shown to be beneficial for a variety of disorders such as Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Autism Spectrum Disorder, and PTSD. However, little is mentioned in the literature about the reciprocal effects of the animal-human interaction. Objective: To evaluate the effects of a one-year dog training programme on PTSD symptomatology in youngsters with PTSD and on dogs' behaviour. Methods: Fifty-three adolescents, previously exposed to interpersonal trauma, were clinically diagnosed with PTSD and assigned to a dog-training programme group (n = 30) and a control group (n = 23) that engaged in other training programmes (e.g. cooking, hairstyling, etc.). Both groups were evaluated at baseline and following 12-months by The Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale for DSM-5 in Children and Adolescents (CAPS-CA-5) and Beck-Depression Inventory (BDI). Additionally, we physiologically measured both emotional and attention dysregulation. Results: Post-12-months training, a significant alleviation of PTSD symptomatology accompanied by lower depression severity was observed in the dog-training group, compared with a insignificant recovery in the control group. Furthermore, improved emotional and attentional regulation was observed in the dog-training group. Measuring the dogs' behaviour revealed increased anxiety and decreased selective attention performance, which was inversely correlated with the beneficial effects observed in the dog-training programme group. Conclusions: Our findings emphasize the role of emotional and attentional regulations on the dog-handler interface, as evidence-based support for the beneficial effects of the dog-training programme, as either a non-pharmacological intervention or as complementary to anti-depressants treatment of PTSD. Though pharmacological treatments increase the patients' well-being by treating certain PTSD symptoms, our suggested dog-training programme seems to influence the PTSD diagnostic status, thus may be implemented in civilians and veterans with PTSD.
34867612|a|Several models of anxiety in autistic adults have focused on the role of intolerance of uncertainty which has biological and evolutionary bases, as a cognitive explanation for the high prevalence of anxiety in autism. This framework suggests that all people are born with a healthy level of intolerance of uncertainty, and as we develop, this intolerance is lessened as we learn when situations are safe and begin to understand and manage the uncertainty. This process of learning about managing uncertainty does not happen in the same way in those who are high in autistic traits, which could be the reason for the high levels of anxiety symptoms commonly seen in this population. We examined archival data of 199 non-autistic and 55 autistic adults from prior studies in which we collected self-report measures of autistic traits, intolerance of uncertainty, sensory processing, and anxiety. We conducted two path analyses to examine the role of intolerance of uncertainty in anxiety in autistic adults. The first model tested the idea that intolerance of uncertainty, an evolutionary phenomenon common for all people, could explain some of the cognitive aspects of anxiety in autism. The second model suggests that primary neurodevelopmental differences associated with autistic traits underlie the sensory sensitivity and sensory seeking behaviors, which in turn increase intolerance of uncertainty and subsequent anxiety. We found that the "neurodevelopmental" model had better model fit than the "evolutionary stress" model, suggesting that the neurodevelopmental impact of higher levels of autistic traits could moderate a non-autistic trajectory of learning to manage uncertainty as children develop and understand that uncertainty is common and acceptable.
34867556|a|There has been increasing interest in parent-mediated interventions (PMIs) for children with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). The objective of this systematic review and meta-analysis was to examine the effect of PMIs compared to no PMI for children with ASD aged 2-17 years. The primary outcome was adaptive functioning rated by a parent or clinician. The secondary outcomes were long-term adaptive functioning rated by the parents, adverse events, core symptoms of ASD, disruptive behavior, parental well-being, quality of life of the child rated by the parents and anxiety. The MEDLINE, PsycInfo, Embase, and CINAHL databases were searched in March 2020. The Cochrane Risk of Bias Tool was used to rate the individual studies, and the certainty in the evidence was evaluated using GRADE. We identified 30 relevant randomized controlled trials (RCTs), including 1,934 participants. A clinically relevant effect of PMIs on parent-rated adaptive functioning was found with a low certainty of evidence [Standard mean difference (SMD): 0.28 (95% CI: -0.01, 0.57)] on Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales (VABS), whereas no clinically relevant effect was seen for clinician-rated functional level, with a very low certainty of evidence [SMD on Clinical Global Impressions (CGI)-severity scale: SMD -0.45 [95% CI: -0.87, -0.03)]. PMIs may slightly improve clinician-rated autism core symptoms [SMD: -0.35 (95% CI: -0.71, 0.02)]. Additionally, no effect of PMIs on parent-rated core symptoms of ASD, parental well-being or adverse effects was identified, all with a low certainty of evidence. There was a moderate certainty of evidence for a clinically relevant effect on disruptive behavior [SMD: 0.55 (95% Cl: 0.36, 0.74)]. The certainty in the evidence was downgraded due to serious risk of bias, lack of blinding, and serious risk of imprecision due to few participants included in meta-analyses. The present findings suggest that clinicians may consider introducing PMIs to children with ASD, but more high-quality RCTs are needed because the effects are not well-established, and the results are likely to change with future studies. The protocol for the systematic review is registered at the Danish Health Authority website (www.sst.dk).
34867555|a|Background: Multiple prenatal factors have been associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) risk. However, current data about the association between antimicrobial use during pregnancy and ASD is limited. Methods: A nested matched case-control study of children with ASD (cases), and children without ASD or other psychiatric or genetic disorders (controls). We compared the use of antimicrobial therapy during the 3 months before conception or during pregnancy between mothers of cases and controls and used multivariate conditional logistic regression models to assess the independent association between maternal use of antimicrobials during pregnancy and the risk of ASD in their offspring. Results: More than half of the mothers in the study (54.1%) used antimicrobial drugs during the 3 months before conception or during pregnancy. Rates of antimicrobial use were lower for mothers of children with ASD compared to mothers of controls (49.0 vs. 55.1%, respectively; p = 0.02), especially during the third trimester of pregnancy (18.8 vs. 22.9%, respectively; p = 0.03), and for the use of penicillins (15.7 vs. 19.7%, respectively; p = 0.06). These case-control differences suggest that antimicrobial administration during pregnancy was associated with a reduced risk of ASD in the offspring (aOR = 0.75, 95% CI = 0.61-0.92). Interestingly, this association was seen only among Jewish but not for the Bedouin mothers (aOR = 0.62, 95% CI = 0.48-0.79 and aOR = 1.21, 95% CI = 0.82-1.79). Conclusions: The reduced risk of ASD associated with prenatal antimicrobials use only in the Jewish population suggest the involvement of other ethnic differences in healthcare services utilization in this association.
34867553|a|This paper presents a unifying theory for autism by applying the framework of a pathogenetic triad to the scientific literature. It proposes a deconstruction of autism into three contributing features (an autistic personality dimension, cognitive compensation, and neuropathological risk factors), and delineates how they interact to cause a maladaptive behavioral phenotype that may require a clinical diagnosis. The autistic personality represents a common core condition, which induces a set of behavioral issues when pronounced. These issues are compensated for by cognitive mechanisms, allowing the individual to remain adaptive and functional. Risk factors, both exogenous and endogenous ones, show pathophysiological convergence through their negative effects on neurodevelopment. This secondarily affects cognitive compensation, which disinhibits a maladaptive behavioral phenotype. The triad is operationalized and methods for quantification are presented. With respect to the breadth of findings in the literature that it can incorporate, it is the most comprehensive model yet for autism. Its main implications are that (1) it presents the broader autism phenotype as a non-pathological core personality domain, which is shared across the population and uncoupled from associated features such as low cognitive ability and immune dysfunction, (2) it proposes that common genetic variants underly the personality domain, and that rare variants act as risk factors through negative effects on neurodevelopment, (3) it outlines a common pathophysiological mechanism, through inhibition of neurodevelopment and cognitive dysfunction, by which a wide range of endogenous and exogenous risk factors lead to autism, and (4) it suggests that contributing risk factors, and findings of immune and autonomic dysfunction are clinically ascertained rather than part of the core autism construct.
34867539|a|Background: The therapeutic effect of bumetanide on autism spectrum disorder (ASD) seems to be controversial. To obtain better evidence on the efficacy of bumetanide, a systematic review and meta-analysis were performed. Methods: Randomized, placebo-controlled trials (RCTs) of bumetanide treatment in children with ASD were identified through systematic review from database inception to January 17, 2021. Subsequently, a meta-analysis was carried out to examine the effect of bumetanide on the severity of symptoms of ASD as assessed by the Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) and Social Responsive Scale (SRS); core symptoms according to criteria of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)-5 of the American Psychiatric Association [social affect (SA), restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities (RRB) and sensory symptoms]; and the therapeutic effect as assessed by Clinical Global Impressions-Efficacy (CGI-E). Results: In total, six RCTs involving 496 participants with ASD were identified in our study. The results showed that bumetanide could significantly improve the severity of the ASD symptoms measured by CARS and SRS. There was also evidence that bumetanide had positive effect on the core symptoms of ASD such as the SA and RRB, but there was no statistically significant effect on sensory symptoms. A significant positive effect on CGI-E scores in ASD patients was also observed. Conclusion: Our meta-analysis provided some support that bumetanide could improve the symptoms of children with ASD. However, additional large-scale longitudinal studies that provide clearer information and better control for confounding factors are needed to confirm our findings.
34867515|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting multiple developmental domains including social communication, behavioral-affective, sensorimotor, and cognitive systems. There is growing evidence for the use of holistic, whole-body, Creative Movement Therapies (CMT) such as music, dance, yoga, theater, and martial arts in addressing the multisystem impairments in ASD. We conducted a comprehensive quantitative and qualitative review of the evidence to date on the effects of CMT on multiple systems in individuals with ASD. The strongest evidence, both in terms of quantity and quality, exists for music and martial arts-based interventions followed by yoga and theater, with very limited research on dance-based approaches. Our review of 72 studies (N = 1,939 participants) across participants with ASD ranging from 3 to 65 years of age suggests that at present there is consistent evidence from high quality studies for small-to-large sized improvements in social communication skills following music and martial arts therapies and medium-to-large improvements in motor and cognitive skills following yoga and martial arts training, with insufficient evidence to date for gains in affective, sensory, and functional participation domains following CMT. Although promising, our review serves as a call for more rigorous high-quality research to assess the multisystem effects of CMT in ASD. Based on the existing literature, we discuss implications of our findings for autism researchers and also provide evidence-based guidelines for clinicians to incorporate CMT approaches in their plan of care for individuals with ASD.
34867169|a|Zinc finger proteins (ZNF) are among the most abundant proteins in eukaryotic genomes. It contains several zinc finger domains that can selectively bind to certain DNA or RNA and associate with proteins, therefore, ZNF can regulate gene expression at the transcriptional and translational levels. In terms of neurological diseases, numerous studies have shown that many ZNF are associated with neurological diseases. The purpose of this review is to summarize the types and roles of ZNF in neuropsychiatric disorders. We will describe the structure and classification of ZNF, then focus on the pathophysiological role of ZNF in neuro-related diseases and summarize the mechanism of action of ZNF in neuro-related diseases.
34866669|a|Critics who are concerned over the epistemological status of psychiatric diagnoses often describe them as being constructed. In contrast, those critics usually see symptoms as relatively epistemologically unproblematic. In this paper I show that symptoms are also constructed. To do this I draw upon the demarcation between data and phenomena. I relate this distinction to psychiatry by portraying behaviour of individuals as data and symptoms as phenomena. I then draw upon philosophers who consider phenomena to be constructed to argue that symptoms are also constructed. Rather than being ready made in the world I show how symptoms are constructs we apply to the world. I highlight this with a historical example and describe methodological constraints on symptom construction. I show the epistemic problems with psychiatric diagnoses are also applicable to symptoms. Following this, I suggest that critics of psychiatric diagnoses should extend their criticism to symptoms or, if they still believe symptoms are relatively epistemologically unproblematic, should rethink their concerns over psychiatric diagnoses.
34866659|a|The objective of this study was to examine the effects of acceptance and commitment training (ACT) plus behavior parent training (BPT), when delivered via telehealth, on parental implementation of behavioral strategies, experiential avoidance (EA), and stress. The study also examined the subsequent effects on the parents' autistic children's behaviors. A multiple baseline design was implemented across four parent-child dyads who participated in the online training. The findings showed that ACT+BPT resulted in parental implementation reaching and maintaining high levels. The training also decreased EA and stress in three parents. Moreover, the parents' ratings of their children's challenging behaviors decreased. However, such a trend was not as clearly depicted by direct measures of the children's behaviors. A social validity interview revealed parents found ACT beneficial in assisting them to learn and use the BPT strategies. Implications and suggestions for future research are discussed.
34866570|a|BACKGROUND: Children and young people with neurodisability often need help to achieve socially acceptable bladder and bowel control. Approaches vary depending on whether or not the impairment results from spinal cord pathology that impairs motor control and sensation of the bladder and bowel. Currently, there is uncertainty about which interventions are effective. OBJECTIVE: The objective was to summarise the available evidence on and current practice for improving continence in children and young people with neurodisability. DESIGN: A systematic review of the effectiveness, cost-effectiveness and factors that modify intervention implementation, alongside a cross-sectional, online survey of current practice with health professionals, parent carers, school and care staff and young people with neurodisability. RESULTS: Twelve databases were searched in the review, resulting in 5756 references; 71 studies (72 papers) were included in the analyses. Most of the evidence was for children with spinal cord pathology, which involved evaluations of pharmacological approaches and surgical techniques, whereas the evidence pertaining to those with non-spinal-cord-related pathology tended to be for behavioural interventions. The methodological quality of studies was rated as being moderate to poor. There were three robust qualitative studies about the experience of continence among children with spinal cord pathology. We found substantial heterogeneity across the interventions that we evaluated in terms of quality, study design and outcomes measured. No economic studies were found. The results were synthesised narratively and reported in text and tables. We did not find any eligible studies evaluating interventions using toilet and clothing adaptations in the review, although the survey highlighted that these types of interventions are frequently used and considered. In total, 949 people responded to the survey: 202 health professionals, 605 parent carers, 122 school and social care staff, and 20 young people. The survey results illustrated the different roles that professionals have in improving continence, highlighting the importance of a multidisciplinary approach to supporting children and young people and their families. Clinicians employ a range of assessments and interventions to improve continence or independent toileting, depending on the needs of the child. LIMITATIONS: Quantitative studies in the review were not methodologically robust. The survey had a risk of response bias. CONCLUSIONS: Our research found a dearth of good-quality evidence for many of the interventions currently in use, and no evidence of experiences of implementing interventions for children with non-spinal-cord-related pathology. There was also no evidence of cost-effectiveness of any of the interventions. FUTURE WORK: There is a need to involve young people and families in the design of high-quality evaluative research for interventions that aim to improve continence. This is especially the case for children with autism and learning disability, who have been neglected in previous evaluative and qualitative research. We recommend better training for health, education and care professionals about toileting, informed by evidence and the lived experiences of children and their families. We recommend a joined-up multidisciplinary and holistic approach to improving continence to maximise independence, dignity and comfort. It is vital that children and young people with neurodisability have early access to regular, integrated assessment of their bladder and bowel health, and are fully supported with appropriate personalised treatment. STUDY REGISTRATION: This study is registered as PROSPERO CRD42018100572. FUNDING: This project was funded by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Health Technology Assessment programme and will be published in full in Health Technology Assessment; Vol. 25, No. 73. See the NIHR Journals Library website for further project information.
34866567|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is heterogeneous and likely entails distinct phenotypes with varying etiologies. Identifying these subgroups may contribute to hypotheses about differential treatment responses. The present study aimed to discern subgroups among children with ASD and anxiety in context of the five-factor model of personality (FFM) and evaluate treatment response differences to two cognitive-behavioral therapy treatments. The present study is a secondary data analysis of children with ASD and anxiety (N=202; ages 7-13; 20.8% female) in a cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) randomized controlled trial (Wood et al., 2020). Subgroups were identified via latent profile analysis of parent-reported FFM data. Treatment groups included standard-of-practice CBT (CC), designed for children with anxiety, and adapted CBT (BIACA), designed for children with ASD and comorbid anxiety. Five subgroups with distinct profiles were extracted. Analysis of covariance revealed CBT response was contingent on subgroup membership. Two subgroups responded better to BIACA on the primary outcome measure and a third responded better to BIACA on a peer-social adaptation measure, while a fourth subgroup responded better to CC on a school-related adaptation measure. These findings suggest that the FFM may be useful in empirically identifying subgroups of children with ASD, which could inform intervention selection decisions for children with ASD and anxiety.
34866530|a|Nuhu and Rapp identified three profiles undergraduates displayed during social interactions. We evaluated the social validity of these three profiles in two studies. In Study 1 we presented video exemplars of speakers representing each profile to undergraduate participants and asked them to rate the speaker in respect to various statements. Results showed that one profile was rated significantly different than the other two profiles on all but one statement. In Study 2 we further evaluated the role of eye contact in the profile that participants rated differently in Study 1. Results from Study 2 showed that a speaker engaging in low eye contact was rated lower than a speaker engaging in either a validated or high level of eye contact. Likewise, participants with self-reported high social competency provided more negative ratings of a speaker who displayed low eye contact than participants with self-reported Moderate and Low social competency.
34866429|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Providers' beliefs about an intervention's fit with a family can affect whether or not they use that intervention with a family. The factors that affect providers' decisions to use evidence-based practices for young autistic children have not been studied. These factors may play a role in the major differences we see in the quality of and access to early intervention services in the community. We looked at differences in providers' use of caregiver coaching, an evidence-based practice, with families from minority or vulnerable backgrounds, and the possible reasons for those differences. We did this to figure out what factors affect providers' use of caregiver coaching. We interviewed 36 early intervention providers from early intervention agencies in two different parts of the United States. Providers pointed out things like what they thought about a family's circumstances that affected their beliefs about how well coaching fits with minority and vulnerable families. Our findings bring attention to these beliefs that likely make accessing evidence-based practices for minority and vulnerable families harder and lessen the quality of care for these families of young autistic children. These findings highlight the need to come up with and use strategies to improve both access to and the quality of evidence-based practices for young autistic children from minority and vulnerable groups.
34866424|a|The field of global autism research lost a pioneer, champion, and innovator with the passing of Dr Li-Ching Lee in May 2021. Dr Lee served as the editor for a special issue in Autism on global autism research (2017, Volume 21, Issue 5) and her substantial impact on autism research and autistic individuals and their families in low- and middle-income countries warrants a place in this special issue. While a giant in the professional arena, her large impact on science is minor compared to the compassion, kindness, and love she brought to her family, friends, and her professional communities at Johns Hopkins, across institutions, her native Taiwan, and the areas in which she conducted her research. Dr Lee was immensely humble and intensely focused on harnessing epidemiology to positively impact the lives of people with autism and developmental disabilities. Her humility and professional dedication was coupled with a desire to keep her own challenges and triumphs private including her courageous efforts to stave off cancer while accomplishing so much in support of others.
34866359|a|BACKGROUND: Valproate use during pregnancy increases risk in malformations and neurodevelopmental disorders. Data from the experimental setting in mice showed valproate is a direct inhibitor of histone deacetylase, inducing histone hyperacetylation, histone methylation, and DNA demethylation causing congenital malformations with an epigenetic inheritance. We investigated potential transgenerational adverse effects of valproate. METHODS: We questioned 108 individuals (from 90 families) suffering complications due to valproate exposure in utero who were parents themselves (85 women and 23 men) about the occurrence of malformations and neurodevelopmental disorders in their children. All were member of Aide aux Parents d'Enfants souffrants du Syndrome de l'AntiConvulsivant (APESAC), a charity created in 2011 to provide personal assistance and support to families suffering complications due to valproate exposure during pregnancy. RESULTS: Among their 187 children they reported 43 (23%) children with malformation(s) (26 hand or foot malformations; 15 dysmorphic facial features; 10 renal/urologic malformations; 6 spina bifida; 4 cardiac malformation; 2 craniosynostosis; 2 cleft lip and palate) and 82 (44%) children with neurodevelopmental disorders (63 problematic behaviors and autism; 41 psychomotor disorders; 16 language problems; 16 attention deficit; 5 mental retardation). Only 88 (47%) children had neither malformation nor developmental disorders. CONCLUSION: These data add to the need for funding pharmacoepidemiological investigations of epigenetic inheritance caused by drugs causing malformations or neurodevelopmental disorders. Individuals exposed in utero to valproate must be informed about the risk, so they can consider fertility options, antenatal diagnosis, and adequate early surveillance.
34866351|a|Advanced parental age at offspring birth has been associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The objective of the current study was to investigate associations between parental age at birth and autism severity. The Rhode Island Consortium for Autism Research and Treatment (RI-CART) study represents a community-based sample with a range of autism severity, including participants with and without ASD. This study involved participants (n = 1178) enrolled in RI-CART with available mother and father ages at birth. Primary data points included the age of mother and father at the participant's birth and results from the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule - Second Edition (ADOS-2). Mothers were 1.7 years older at the time of birth of the child with ASD, as compared to mothers of offspring without ASD. Fathers of children with ASD were 1.6 years older at the time of birth than fathers of children without ASD. The age of both parents at offspring birth displayed a positive, statistically significant association with overall ASD severity and the severity of restricted/repetitive behaviors. This finding was driven by the association between parental age and the severity of compulsions or rituals. Intelligence and adaptive functioning did not moderate the relationship between parental age and ASD severity. This study extends prior research to show that advanced parental age at birth is associated with the severity as well as the presence of ASD in offspring.
34865853|a|BACKGROUND: ADNP is essential for embryonic development. As such, de novo ADNP mutations lead to an intractable autism/intellectual disability syndrome requiring investigation. METHODS: Mimicking humans, CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats)-Cas9 editing produced mice carrying heterozygous Adnp p.Tyr718* (Tyr), a paralog of the most common ADNP syndrome mutation. Phenotypic rescue was validated by treatment with the microtubule/autophagy-protective ADNP fragment NAPVSIPQ (NAP). RESULTS: RNA sequencing of spleens, representing a peripheral biomarker source, revealed Tyr-specific sex differences (e.g., cell cycle), accentuated in females (with significant effects on antigen processing and cellular senescence) and corrected by NAP. Differentially expressed, NAP-correctable transcripts, including the autophagy and microbiome resilience-linked FOXO3, were also deregulated in human patient-derived ADNP-mutated lymphoblastoid cells. There were also Tyr sex-specific microbiota signatures. Phenotypically, Tyr mice, similar to patients with ADNP syndrome, exhibited delayed development coupled with sex-dependent gait defects. Speech acquisition delays paralleled sex-specific mouse syntax abnormalities. Anatomically, dendritic spine densities/morphologies were decreased with NAP amelioration. These findings were replicated in the Adnp+/- mouse, including Foxo3 deregulation, required for dendritic spine formation. Grooming duration and nociception threshold (autistic traits) were significantly affected only in males. Early-onset tauopathy was accentuated in males (hippocampus and visual cortex), mimicking humans, and was paralleled by impaired visual evoked potentials and correction by acute NAP treatment. CONCLUSIONS: Tyr mice model ADNP syndrome pathology. The newly discovered ADNP/NAP target FOXO3 controls the autophagy initiator LC3 (microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3), with known ADNP binding to LC3 augmented by NAP, protecting against tauopathy. NAP amelioration attests to specificity, with potential for drug development targeting accessible biomarkers.
34865678|a|BACKGROUND: Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has had a disproportionate impact on people with intellectual disability (PwID). PwID are at higher risk of mental illness and receive psychotropic prescribing 'off licence' also, to manage distress behaviour. The lockdown and reduction of multidisciplinary face-to-face appointments had an impact on care delivery, the recourse possibly being psychotropic prescribing. It is imperative to comprehend the influence the pandemic had on psychotropic prescribing patterns to enable future planning. AIMS: The aim was to understand the impact of the pandemic by comparing psychotropic prescribing patterns during the England lockdown with the prescribing patterns before lockdown in specialist urban and rural psychiatric services for PwID. METHOD: Data was collected from Cornwall (rural) and London (urban) intellectual disability services in England as a service evaluation project to rationalise psychotropic prescribing. PwID in both services open across January 2020 to January 2021 were included. Baseline patient demographics including age, gender, ethnicity, intellectual disability level and neurodevelopmental and psychological comorbidities were collected. Baseline psychotropic prescribing and subsequent % change for each psychotropic group for the two services was compared using Pearson's chi-square and z-statistic (two tailed) with significance taken at P < 0.05. RESULTS: The two centres London (n = 113) and Cornwall (n = 97) were largely comparable but for baseline differences in terms of presence of severe mental illness (37 v. 86, P < 0.001), challenging behaviour (44 v. 57, P < 0.05) and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (37 v. 3, P < 0.001). There was an overall increase in psychotropic prescribing during lockdown in urban as compared with rural settings (11% v. 2%). CONCLUSIONS: The pandemic caused an increase in psychotropic prescribing associated with lockdown severity and urban settings. Team structures could have played a role.
34865596|a|INTRODUCTION: Psychotropic medication is often prescribed to individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities who engage in challenging and other behavior (e.g., aggression and stereotypy, respectively), but there is limited understanding of the effects of these medications on behavior. OBJECTIVE: Within the context of a larger study that evaluated the effects of psychotropic medication regimen changes on the presentation of challenging behavior, this study describes the presentation of stereotypic behavior of three individuals diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. METHODS: Stereotypy was measured during weekly, one-hour, direct observations and during the control and ignore conditions of functional analyses of challenging behavior (which were conducted following changes in psychotropic medication regimens). RESULTS: Patterns of stereotypy varied over time, but not significantly, and at times seemed to coincide with medication changes. DISCUSSION: Our results suggest stereotypy persists throughout adulthood; however, additional research is needed.
34865332|a|OBJECTIVE: To observe the effects of penetrating technique of scalp acupuncture on emotion, sleep and function development in children of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). METHODS: A total of 60 SAD children aged 3 to 6 years were randomized in a control group (music education rehabilitation,n=30) and an observation group (penetrating technique of scalp acupuncture + music education rehabilitation,n=30). In the two groups, the treatment for 3 months was as 1 course, and 2 courses of treatment were required. Before and after treatment, the changes were observed in childhood autism rating scale (CARS), emotion regulation subscale (ER), children's sleep habits questionnaire (CSHQ) and children autism and psycho-educational profile for autistic and developmentally disabled children (C-PEP-3), separately. RESULTS: Compared with the scores before treatment, CARS score, the score of each subscale of CSHQ, e.g. bedtime resistance, sleep onset delay, irregular sleep duration, sleep anxiety, parasomnias and daytime sleepiness as well as the total score of CSHQ were all reduced in children of two groups (P<0.05); and the score of ER and C-PEP-3 were all increased (P<0.05) after 6 months' treatment. Compared with the control group, ER score was increased in 3 and 6 months after treatment (P<0.05), CARS score was reduced (P<0.05) and C-PEP-3 score was increased obviously (P<0.05) 6 months after treatment in the observation group; but the scores of the subscale for night waking and sleep disordered breathing did not changed noticeably (P > 0.05). CONCLUSION: Penetrating technique of scalp acupuncture improves the emotion and sleep disorder and promotes the function development in ASD children.
34865202|a|We explored the role of negative performance beliefs and self-focused attention considered central to psychological models of social anxiety but not studied in autism. Firstly, we compared self- and observer ratings of performance on a social task for 71 young autistic people, 41 high and 30 low in social anxiety, finding a significant main effect of social anxiety but not rater. Subsequently, 76 autistic young people, 46 high and 30 low social anxiety completed measures of interoceptive sensibility and focus of attention following a social task. Only heightened interoceptive sensibility fully mediated the relationship between self-ratings of social performance and social anxiety. These findings suggest awareness of bodily sensations are critical to anxiety in social situations with implications for treatment.
34864432|a|BACKGROUND: Mothers with children with ASD, often being primary caregivers, experience high levels of parenting stress and hold essential information about their children's wellbeing. There is however lack of information about their experiences in the UAE. AIMS: The study aims to explore challenges and support structures of mothers with children with ASD in the UAE. METHODS AND PROCEDURES: 17 expat mothers (Age range = 33-58 years) with a child with ASD were interviewed about their experiences with diagnoses, therapeutic interventions, support networks, and the pandemic. OUTCOMES AND RESULTS: Thematic analysis showed that initially most mothers struggled with accessing information to seek correct diagnoses, admission in mainstream international schools with typically developing children, and finding appropriate therapeutic services. Several mothers narrated experiences of not receiving optimum support from their partners, feeling rejected from extended family members, and facing hardships during the pandemic. Majority however appeared to be extremely satisfied with support groups where they felt heard and exchanged experience-based information crucial for children's wellbeing. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Findings highlight the need for the government to facilitate centralized channels of information for expat parents with children with developmental disabilities, formalizing more support groups for mothers in the UAE, and increasing knowledge about autism to decrease biases.
34864043|a|Brain functional network (BFN), usually estimated from blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), has been proven to be a powerful tool to study the organization of the brain and discover biomarkers for diagnosis of brain disorders. Prior to BFN estimation and classification, extracting representative BOLD signals from brain regions of interest (ROIs) is a critical step. Traditional extraction methods include averaging, peaking operation and dimensionality reduction, often leading to signal cancellation and information loss. In this paper, we propose a novel method, namely time-constrained multiset canonical correlation analysis (TMCCA), to extract representative BOLD signals for subsequent BFN estimation and classification. Different from traditional methods that equally treat all BOLD signals in a ROI, the proposed method assigns weights to different BOLD signals, and learns the optimal weights to make the extracted representative signals jointly maximize the multiple correlations between ROIs. Importantly, time-constraint is incorporated into our proposed method, which can effectively encode nonlinear relationship among BOLD signals. To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method, the extracted BOLD signals is used to estimate BFN and, in turn, identify brain disorders, including mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and autistic spectrum disorder (ASD). Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed TMCCA can lead to better performance than traditional methods.
34863679|a|The present study investigated the role of neuroinflammation and brain oxidative stress induced by neonatal treatment with lipopolysaccharides (LPS) on the development of autism spectrum disorder (ASD)-like behaviors and disruptive hippocampal neurogenesis in rats by exploring the chemopreventive effects of alpha-glycosyl isoquercitrin (AGIQ) as an antioxidant. AGIQ was dietary administered to dams at 0.25% or 0.5% (w/w) from gestational day 18 until postnatal day (PND) 21 on weaning and then to pups until the adult stage on PND 77. The pups were intraperitoneally injected with LPS (1 mg/kg body weight) on PND 3. At PND 6, LPS alone increased Iba1+ and CD68+ cell numbers without changing the CD163+ cell number and strongly upregulated pro-inflammatory cytokine gene expression (Il1a, Il1b, Il6, Nfkb, and Tnf) in the hippocampus, and increased brain malondialdehyde levels. At PND 10, pups decreased ultrasonic vocalization (USV), suggesting the induction of pro-inflammatory responses and oxidative stress to trigger communicative deficits. By contrast, LPS alone upregulated Nfe2l2 expression at PND 6, increased Iba1+, CD68+, and CD163+ cell numbers, and upregulated Tgfb1 at PND 21, suggesting anti-inflammatory responses until the weaning period. However, LPS alone disrupted hippocampal neurogenesis at weaning and suppressed social interaction parameters and freezing rates at fear acquisition and extinction during the adolescent stage. On PND 77, neuroinflammatory responses had mostly disappeared; however, disruptive neurogenesis and fear memory deficits were sustained. AGIQ ameliorated most changes on acute pro-inflammatory responses and oxidative stress at PND 6, and the effects on USVs at PND 10 and neurogenesis and behavioral parameters throughout the adult stage. These results suggested that neonatal LPS treatment induced acute but transient neuroinflammation, triggering the progressive disruption of hippocampal neurogenesis leading to abnormal behaviors in later life. AGIQ treatment was effective for ameliorating LPS-induced progressive changes by critically suppressing initial pro-inflammatory responses and oxidative stress.
34863292|a|Family-based interventions are widely recommended as a first line treatment for children and young people with Anorexia Nervosa. There is clear evidence that model-adherent delivery of specific eating disorder focused family interventions has the potential to help adolescents with Anorexia Nervosa, who have typically engaged in extreme dietary restriction and lost a significant amount of weight over a relatively short period of time. Nevertheless, there remains a significant number of young people with restrictive eating disorders for whom family-based interventions for Anorexia Nervosa prove less effective, suggesting adaptations may be indicated for some. In this paper we provide a rationale and structure for considering a number of possible adaptations to the delivery of family-based therapy for anorexia nervosa specifically intended to enhance its relevance and potential effectiveness for children and adolescents on the autism spectrum; a subgroup known to represent a significant minority in eating disorder populations who have been identified as having relatively poor outcomes. Past research has shown that certain family-based treatments are effective for many children and adolescents who develop Anorexia Nervosa. At the same time this type of treatment approach in its current form does not work for everyone. Recent research has highlighted the overlap between anorexia and autism and the need for the development of adaptations to existing treatments to better meet the requirements of people on the autism spectrum who develop anorexia. With this in mind we propose a number of autism-related adaptations that could be made to family-based treatments for anorexia. We hope that these might be formally tested in the future to see if these adaptations improve outcomes for this group of individuals.
34863106|a|BACKGROUND: The current study used eye tracking to investigate attention and recognition memory in Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS), a rare genetic disorder characterized by intellectual disability, motor delays, and a high likelihood of comorbid autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Social deficits represent a core feature of ASD, including decreased propensity to orient to or show preference for social stimuli. METHODS: We used a visual paired-comparison task with both social and non-social images, assessing looking behavior to a novel image versus a previously viewed familiar image to characterize social attention and recognition memory in PMS (n = 22), idiopathic ASD (iASD, n = 38), and typically developing (TD) controls (n = 26). The idiopathic ASD cohort was divided into subgroups with intellectual disabilities (ID; developmental quotient < 70) and without (developmental quotient > 70) and the PMS group into those with and without a co-morbid ASD diagnosis. RESULTS: On measures of attention, the PMS group with a comorbid ASD diagnosis spent less time viewing the social images compared to non-social images; the rate of looking back and forth between images was lowest in the iASD with ID group. Furthermore, while all groups demonstrated intact recognition memory when novel non-social stimuli were initially presented (pre-switch), participants with PMS showed no preference during the post-switch memory presentation. In iASD, the group without ID, but not the group with ID, showed a novelty preference for social stimuli. Across indices, individuals with PMS and ASD performed more similarly to PMS without ASD and less similarly to the iASD group. CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrate further evidence of differences in attention and memory for social stimuli in ASD and provide contrasts between iASD and PMS.
34862981|a|BACKGROUND: The characteristics of adolescents who die by suicide have hitherto been examined in uncontrolled study designs, thereby precluding examination of risk factors. The degree to which antecedents of nonfatal self-harm and suicide at young age differ remains unknown. METHOD: We delineated two nested case-control studies of patients aged 10-19 years using the Clinical Practice Research Datalink with interlinked hospital and national mortality records. Cases were adolescents who between 1st January 2003 and 31st December 2018 had died from suicide (N = 324) - study 1; experienced their first self-harm episode (N = 56,008) - study 2. In both studies, cases were matched on sex, age and practice-level deprivation quintile to 25 controls. By fitting conditional logistic regression, we examined how risks varied according to psychiatric diagnoses, prescribed psychotropic medication, patterns of clinical contact and area-level deprivation. RESULTS: Suicides occurred more often among boys (66%), but self-harm was more common in girls (68%). Most individuals who self-harmed or died from suicide presented to their GP at least once in the preceding year (85% and 75% respectively). Only a third of cases had one of the examined diagnostic categories recorded. Depression was most strongly associated with elevated risks for both outcomes (self-harm: OR 7.9; 95% CI 7.8-8.2; suicide: OR 7.4; 95% CI 5.5-9.9). Except for autism spectrum disorder, all other diagnostic categories were linked with similar risk elevations for self-harm as for suicide. Whilst self-harm risk rose incrementally with increasing levels of area-level deprivation, suicide risks did not. CONCLUSIONS: We observed few marked differences in risk factor profiles for nonfatal self-harm versus suicide. As most adolescents who had harmed themselves or died by suicide were known to services in the preceding year, their underlying pathology may not be adequately identified and treated. Our findings highlight the need for a multiagency approach to treatment and prevention.
34862953|a|Limited interventions exist that support student's school participation. This paper describes a theoretical model of school participation and the iterative process that led to the development of an intervention that aims to improve the school participation of students on the autism spectrum and their typically developing peers. Literature on autism, school participation and intervention research were integrated to develop a theoretical model. Focus groups, a Delphi study, online surveys, and reference group consultation helped to develop and refine the intervention. A novel school-based intervention was developed. The impetus to develop interventions with a strong theoretical rationale is discussed.
34862895|a|BACKGROUND: Well-structured monitoring system is crucial to identify interventions for children with Neurodevelopmental Disorders (NDD). SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The NIDA Network enrolled more than 760 at risk for NDD and typically developing infants to detect early signs of NDD. RESULTS: The NIDA Network was born in some Italian regions to engage clinical centers in a research project. It is increasingly turning out to be a national monitoring project well integrated in the Italian National Health System policies. CONCLUSIONS: The NIDA Network activities are finalized at diagnosis and interventions to improve quality of life of children with NDD and their families.
34862893|a|BACKGROUND: Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder and a long-term condition that may require psychiatric life-long care. Transition from Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS) to Adult Mental Health Services (AMHS) possibly concerns a great portion of patients with ASD. This study focuses on transitional age youth (TAY) with ASD and proposes specific innovative tools to manage the transition process. SUBJECTS AND METHODS: This explorative study focuses on TAY with ASD. Data on socio-demographic characteristics and personal medical history was collected. Three self-rated questionnaires were used: the Health of The Nation Outcome Scales For Children And Adolescents (HoNOSCA-SR), to assess care need, the World Health Organization Quality of Life-BREF (WHOQOL-BREF) scale and the Transition Readiness and Appropriateness Measure (TRAM), to evaluate barriers to functioning. RESULTS: The sample was composed of 10 patients with ASD aged from 17 to 18. The majority of them were male (70%) and born in Belgium (60%). The median (interquartile range) age of ASD diagnosis was 16 (13-17). The comorbidity rate was 60% for psychiatric disorders and 30% for somatic diseases; 80% of the participants were under psychotropic drugs. The average questionnaires scores were respectively: HoNOSCA-SR = 21.63 (+-9.90), WHOQOL-BREF physical health = 50.88 (+-19.14), psychological health = 36.13 (+-13.97), social relationships = 48.50 (+-18.23) and environment = 59.38 (+-14.08); TRAM's number of barriers to functioning were 4.25 (+-1.39). CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary data, accompanied by current recommendations, allow to clarify the strategies to an optimal transition in ASD. Special insight is given to strategies to reach a well-managed transition from CAMHS to AMHS, such as the assessment of psychiatric and somatic comorbidities, the care need continuity, the elaboration, in advance, of a transition plan, the assessment of the barriers to functioning, and the involvement of young patients and their families.
34862889|a|NDs are a collection of disorders that appear in the early stages of development and are variously associated with cognitive and behavioral dysfunctions. The strong heritability of these conditions (in particular autism and schizophrenia) argues in favor of a genetic origin. On the other hand, the massive increase in NDs implies a preponderant role of environmental factors and epigenetic mechanism (Panisi et al. 2021).
34862853|a|Findings on age-related cognitive effects in autism in adulthood are inconsistent across studies. As these studies substantially differ in their methodology, replication studies are needed. In this replication study frequentist (i.e., null-hypothesis significance testing), and Bayesian statistics were used to investigate the hypothesis that in autistic adults compared to non-autistic adults mostly parallel, but also protective age-related cognitive effects can be observed. Participants were 88 autistic adults, and 88 non-autistic matched comparisons (age range: 30-89 years, mean age: 55 years). Cognitive measures were administered on the following six domains: verbal memory, visual memory, working memory, Theory of Mind (ToM), verbal fluency, and processing speed, and self-reported cognitive failures. Non-autistic adults outperformed autistic adults on ToM, verbal fluency, and verbal memory, but only the first two were confirmed with Bayesian replication analyses. Also, more cognitive failures were reported by autistic adults. No interactions between group and age were observed, suggesting a parallel age-related effect on all cognitive domains. In sum, previously observed difficulties in ToM and verbal fluency were replicated which seem to persist at older age. Previously reported parallel age-related cognitive patterns were replicated, yet no evidence for protective age-related patterns was found. LAY SUMMARY: We investigated whether our previous findings on cognitive aging in autism could be confirmed in a new study measuring the cognitive effects of age in autistic and non-autistic adults. As expected, tasks that younger autistic adults had difficulties with (theory of mind, fluency) were also difficult for older autistic adults, and the effect of age itself was similar in autistic and non-autistic adults. Unexpectedly, we observed no protective effects (less cognitive aging) in autism.
34862305|a|BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that cortical anatomy may be aytpical in autism spectrum disorder. The wingless-type MMTV integration site family, member 2 (WNT2), a candidate gene for autism spectrum disorder, may regulate cortical development. However, it is unclear whether WNT2 variants are associated with altered cortical thickness in autism spectrum disorder. METHODS: In a sample of 118 people with autism spectrum disorder and 122 typically developing controls, we investigated cortical thickness using FreeSurfer software. We then examined the main effects of the WNT2 variants and the interactions of group x SNP and age x SNP for each hemisphere and brain region that was altered in people with autism spectrum disorder. RESULTS: Compared to neurotypical controls, people with autism spectrum disorder showed reduced mean cortical thickness in both hemispheres and 9 cortical regions after false discovery rate correction, including the right cingulate gyrus, the orbital gyrus, the insula, the inferior frontal gyrus (orbital part and triangular part), the lateral occipitotemporal gyrus, the posterior transverse collateral sulcus, the lateral sulcus and the superior temporal sulcus. In the full sample, 2 SNPs of WNT2 (rs6950765 and rs2896218) showed age x SNP interactions for the mean cortical thickness of both hemispheres, the middle-posterior cingulate cortex and the superior temporal cortex. LIMITATIONS: We examined the genetic effect for each hemisphere and the 9 regions that were altered in autism spectrum disorder. The age effect we found in this cross-sectional study needs to be examined in longitudinal studies. CONCLUSION: Based on neuroimaging and genetic data, our findings suggest that WNT2 variants might be associated with altered cortical thickness in autism spectrum disorder. Whether and how these WNT2 variants might involve cortical thinning requires further investigation. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov no. NCT01582256. PROTOCOL REGISTRATION: National Institutes of Health no. NCT00494754.
34861861|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are one of the most prevalent neurodevelopmental disabilities of early childhood. Practicing nurses are in a key position to help patients with ASDs and/or their caregivers/families. This study was conducted to assess self-rated familiarity with ASDs among practicing nurses in Palestine. The study also aimed to identify the sociodemographic and practice variables that could predict high self-rated familiarity scores. METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study using a questionnaire. The study was conducted in the period between January 2019 and May 2019. The questionnaire collected: 1) the sociodemographic, pedagogic, and practice variables of the nurses, 2) their self-rated familiarity with signs and symptoms, treatment options, and community resources of ASDs, 3) their self-rated confidence in their abilities to provide counseling for parents/family/caregivers on the drugs prescribed for children/patients with ASDs and their potential adverse effects, and 4) their willingness to receive education/training on issues in ASDs. RESULTS: The questionnaire was completed by 357 practicing nurses. The practicing nurses self-reported inadequate familiarity with symptoms, treatment, and community resources of ASDs. The mean familiarity score was 35.8% (SD: 18.9%). The nurses also expressed low confidence in their ability to provide counseling services to caregivers/families of children with ASDs. About 75% of the nurses agreed that they could benefit from taking a continuing educational/training program in the area of ASDs and about 82% of the nurses agreed that the nursing school curriculum should include courses in the area of ASDs. The multiple linear regression model showed that higher familiarity scores were predicted by having longer practical experience, having a higher academic degree in nursing, and having a continuing educational course/program on ASDs. CONCLUSION: Findings of this study highlighted inadequate familiarity with issues of ASDs among practicing nurses. Higher familiarity was predicted by the length of practical experience, higher academic degree in nursing, and having continuing educational course/program on ASDs. Specifically designed pedagogic interventions might be helpful in increasing familiarity of practicing nurses on ASDs. More investigations are still needed to evaluate if these interventions can improve familiarity and services provided to patients with ASDs.
34861830|a|
34861744|a|Protein based therapeutics have the potential to treat a variety of diseases, however, safe and effective methods for delivering them into cells need to be developed before their clinical potential can be realized. Peptide fusions have great potential for improving intracellular delivery of proteins. However, very few peptides have been identified that can increase the intracellular delivery of proteins, and new peptides that can enhance intracellular protein delivery are greatly needed. In this report we demonstrate that the coiled-coil forming peptide (KVSALKE)5 (termed K5) can function as a cell penetrating peptide (CPP), and can also complex other proteins that contain its partner peptide E5. We show here that GFP and Cas9 fused to the K5 peptide had dramatically enhanced cell uptake in a variety of cell lines, and was able to edit neurons and astrocytes in the striatum and hippocampus of mice after a direct intracranial injection. Collectively, these studies demonstrate that the coiled-coil forming peptide (KVSALKE)5 is a new class of multifunctional CPPs that has great potential for improving the delivery of proteins into cells and in vivo. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
34861668|a|Psychiatric disorders in first-degree relatives (FDRs) often differ from the index patient's diagnosis, suggesting that there is genetic contribution to psychiatric disorders in which related cases do not all map to the same diagnosis as the index case. Our aim is to look for psychiatric comorbidities across major mental illness using three approaches, genetics, clinical diagnosis and brain imaging to address common associations and pathology among mental illnesses. Genome-wide association studies from the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium showed single gene polymorphisms are common across 5 major psychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia (SZ), bipolar disorder (BD), major depressive disorder (MDD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Clinically, results of Taiwan's nationwide population studies showed that other major psychiatric disorders were more likely to coaggregate in families with an index case of an individual with a psychiatric disorder, compared to control families. Finally, resting functional connectivity (FC) MRI and whole brain connetomic analysis of SZ, BD-I, BD-II, MDD and healthy controls, revealed that the four groups of patients shared similar patterns of abnormal neural substrate in the brain that differed from controls. In conclusion, using big data from genetics, administrative health claims and brain imaging, we identified concordance, indicating dimensional coherence of genetic heritability, clinical mutual associations and common neurobiological substrates across major psychiatric disorders. These results will challenge the current diagnostic classification system, and possibly move psychiatry beyond descriptive syndromes towards a nosology informed by disease cause.
34860794|a|
34860783|a|PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to explore the experiences of autistic women who breastfed. STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: We used a qualitative phenomenology design and a thematic analysis method. Semistructured interviews were conducted using a purposive sample from social media support groups for autistic adults. The interview involved one overarching question about their breastfeeding experience. RESULTS: Twenty-three autistic women who breastfed their infant(s) participated in our study. Three main themes were identified including intense sensory perception, focused determination, and one size doesn't fit all. Three subthemes helped to describe intense sensory perception: overstimulated, overtouched, and overwhelmed. CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Autistic adults can have social interaction and expressive communication differences. Nurses can promote positive communication and provide appropriate care through supportive action. These findings offer a guide for nurses to better understand the experiences of autistic breastfeeding women.
34860312|a|This study examined sleep and its cognitive and affective correlates in adults with and without autism spectrum disorder (ASD), utilizing UK Biobank data. There were no group differences in subjective sleep duration [n = 220 ASD; n = 2200 general population (GP)]. Accelerometer measures of sleep duration or nighttime activity did not differ by group, but sleep efficiency was marginally lower in ASD (n = 83 ASD; n = 824 GP). Sleep efficiency was associated with wellbeing and mental health, and pathways between accelerometer sleep measures and wellbeing and mental health were significantly stronger for adults with ASD (who also reported substantially poorer wellbeing and > 5 x likelihood of experiencing mental distress). These findings highlight the need to monitor sleep to maintain good mental health in adult ASD.
34859933|a|BACKGROUND: Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) has been associated with psychiatric and neurocognitive disorders. Those with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are prone to gastrointestinal (GI) diseases, but most research has been done on children. Our aim was to determine the relationship between GERD and autism in adults and assess GERD-related complications in those with autism. METHODS: A national cohort of adults aged 18 and above with GERD with and without ASD were compared to those without GERD. Complications of GERD that were studied included Barrett's esophagus, erosive esophagitis, esophageal stricture, ulcer, and malignancy. Conditions associated with GERD were evaluated including chronic cough, wheezing, sore throat, non-cardiac chest pain, and hoarseness. GERD treatment that was evaluated included proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), H2 receptor antagonists (H2RA), and anti-reflux surgery. KEY RESULTS: There was an increased risk of GERD in subjects with ASD (p = 0.0001). Erosive esophagitis and esophageal ulcer were more likely to occur in those with GERD and ASD (p = 0.0001). Those with ASD were at higher risk of suffering from wheezing following a diagnosis of GERD compared to those without ASD (p = 0.0001). Those with GERD and ASD were more likely to be treated with an H2RA both as monotherapy and in combination with PPI versus those without ASD (p = 0.0001 and p = 0.0037, respectively). CONCLUSIONS AND INFERENCES: Adult patients with ASD are more likely to have GERD as well as complications including erosive esophagitis and esophageal ulcer. Treatment of patients with GERD and ASD is not consistent and may suggest health care disparities.
34859765|a|OBJECTIVES: Disability awareness training is mandated by the United Nations Convention on People with Disabilities (UNCRPD), but there is a paucity of evidence regarding the systematic evaluation of the effectiveness of such training. This study describes the evaluation of a pilot intellectual disability awareness programme for law enforcement officers (LEOs) in Ireland. METHODS: Pre-and post-training Likert scales and a semi-structured survey were used to evaluate the effectiveness of an intellectual disabilities awareness programme delivered to LEOs. Quantitative differences in Likert scores and thematic analyses of practice-based responses were used in evaluation. RESULTS: Twenty-two LEOs participated in the training and 11 completed the evaluation cycle. Statistically significant improvements were found in participants' self-rated knowledge of intellectual disability, their understanding of the challenges faced by people with intellectual disabilities in law enforcement interactions, their communication skills and their knowledge of how to approach a person with a disability in crisis. Thematic analysis excavated potential practical application of learning around pre-arrest considerations, recognition of disability, communication skills and need for procedural safeguards. CONCLUSIONS: An approach grounded in the views of people with intellectual disabilities and with emphasis on recognition of disability, communication, accessibility of information and providing appropriate support in custody, appears to promote improvement in self-reported knowledge and prospective application in LEOs. The findings of this study are potentially applicable to countries that have ratified the UNCRPD.
34859733|a|
34859529|a|De novo variants in QRICH1 (Glutamine-rich protein 1) has recently been reported in 11 individuals with intellectual disability. The function of QRICH1 is largely unknown but it is likely to play a key role in the unfolded response of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress through transcriptional control of proteostasis. In this study, we present 27 additional individuals and delineate the clinical and molecular spectrum of the individuals (n=38) with QRICH1 variants. The main clinical features were mild to moderate developmental delay/intellectual disability (71%), non-specific facial dysmorphism (92%) and hypotonia (39%). Additional findings included poor weight gain (29%), short stature (29%), autism spectrum disorder (29%), seizures (24%) and scoliosis (18%). Minor structural brain abnormalities were reported in 52% of the individuals with brain imaging. Truncating or splice variants were found in 28 individuals and 10 had missense variants. Four variants were inherited from mildly affected parents. This study confirms that heterozygous QRICH1 variants cause a neurodevelopmental disorder including short stature and expands the phenotypic spectrum to include poor weight gain, scoliosis, hypotonia, minor structural brain anomalies, and seizures. Inherited variants from mildly affected parents are reported for the first time, suggesting variable expressivity. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
34859339|a|Discernment of possible sex-based variations in presentations of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) symptoms is limited by smaller female samples with ASD and confounds with ASD ascertainment. A large national cohort of individuals with autism, SPARK, allowed parent report data to be leveraged to examine whether intrinsic child characteristics and extrinsic factors differentially impact males and females with ASD. Small but consistent sex differences in individuals with ASD emerged related to both intrinsic and extrinsic factors, with different markers for males and females. Language concerns in males may make discernment of ASD more straightforward, while early motor concerns in females may hamper diagnosis as such delays are not identified within traditional ASD diagnostic criteria.
34859338|a|The ability to infer intentions from observed behavior and predict actions based on this inference, known as intention attribution (IA), has been hypothesized to be impaired in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The underlying neural processes, however, have not been conclusively determined. The aim of this study was to examine the neural signature of IA in children and adolescents with ASD, and to elucidate potential links to contextual updating processes using electroencephalography. Results did not indicate that IA or early contextual updating was impaired in ASD. However, there was evidence of aberrant processing of expectation violations in ASD, particularly if the expectation was based on IA. Results are discussed within the context of impaired predictive coding in ASD.
34858496|a|Neonicotinoids are pesticides that act as agonists of nicotinic receptors for acetylcholine in insects' central nervous system (CNS). Chronic exposure to neonicotinoids in humans is related to autism, memory loss, and finger tremor. In this article, we evaluate the effect of subchronic oral administration of two neonicotinoids in the same mixture: clothianidin and thiacloprid. Decreasing doses of both pesticides were administered to rats starting from the lethal dose 50 (LD50) reported by the manufacturer. Our results indicate that the administration of three doses of decreasing amounts of LD50 (5/10, 4/10, and 3/10 LD50) resulted in 100% death in all cases. Ten administration times of 2/10 LD50 of the mixture caused only 20% of death cases after twenty-seven days, which was determined as a subchronic administration scheme. The animals administered 2/10 LD50 showed behavioral alterations after the first and second administration. Electrographic studies showed abnormal discharge patterns in the CNS. 72 h after the tenth dose, learning and memory tests were performed in the Morris water maze. Our results revealed significant decreases in permanence at the quadrant and the number of crosses (P=0.0447,  P=0.0193, respectively), which represent alterations in the short-term memory test, but there were no significant changes in a long-term memory test. Likewise, the brains of these animals showed tissue architecture loss, nucleosomal retraction, and a significant increase in the pycnosis of the granular neurons of the dentate gyrus analyzed at 72 h after the last dose (P=0.0125). Toxic effects and cognitive deterioration that have been found in communities living near contaminated areas are probably related to the agricultural use of neonicotinoids.
34858344|a|Children conceived through intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) have been reported to have a higher risk of many abnormalities and disorders, including autism and intellectual disability, which may be due to bypassing of the natural sperm selection process during ICSI. Zona pellucida (ZP)-bound spermatozoa (ZPBS) have normal morphology and nuclear DNA. Using these spermatozoa for ICSI results in better outcomes compared with conventional ICSI. However, differences besides morphology that exist between sperm selected by ZP and by an embryologist and whether these differences affect the risk of autism in offspring after ICSI are unclear. To explore these questions, we compared genome-wide DNA methylation profiles between ZPBS and manually selected spermatozoa (MSS)using single-cell bisulfite sequencing. Global DNA methylation levels were significantly lower in ZPBS than in MSS. Using gene ontology (GO) analysis, genes overlapping differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were enriched in biological processes involving neurogenesis. Furthermore, we found that 47.8% of autism candidate genes were associated with DMRs, compared with 37.1% of matched background genes (P<0.001). This was mainly because of the high proportion of autism candidate genes with bivalent chromatin structure. In conclusion, bivalent chromatin structure results in large differences in the methylation of autism genes between MSS and ZPBS. ICSI using MSS, which increases the risk of methylation mutations compared with ZPBS, may lead to a higher risk of autism in offspring.
34858146|a|Faces convey a great amount of socially relevant information related to emotional and mental states, identity and intention. Processing of face information is a key mechanism for social and cognitive development, such that newborn babies are already tuned to recognize and orient to faces and simple schematic face-like patterns since the first hours of life. Similar to neonates, also non-human primates and domestic chicks have been shown to express orienting responses to faces and schematic face-like patterns. More importantly, existing studies have hypothesized that early disturbances of these mechanisms represent one of the earliest biomarker of social deficits in autism spectrum disorders (ASD). We used VPA exposure to induce neurodevelopmental changes associated with ASD in domestic chicks and tested whether VPA could impact the expression of the animals' approach responses to schematic face-like stimuli. We found that VPA impairs the chicks' preference responses to these social stimuli. Based on the results shown here and on previous studies, we propose the domestic chick as animal model to investigate the biological mechanisms underlying face processing deficits in ASD.
34858145|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) have long-term implications on functioning at multiple levels. In this perspective, we offer a brainstem-informed autism framework (BIAF) that traces the protracted neurobehavioral manifestations of ASD to early life brainstem dysfunctions. Early life brainstem-mediated markers involving functions of autonomic/arousal regulation, sleep-wake homeostasis, and sensorimotor integration are delineated. Their possible contributions to the early identification of susceptible infants are discussed. We suggest that the BIAF expands our multidimensional understanding of ASD by focusing on the early involvement of brainstem systems. Importantly, we propose an integrated BIAF screener that brings about the prospect of a sensitive and reliable early life diagnostic scheme for weighing the risk for ASD. The BIAF screener could provide clinicians substantial gains in the future and may carve customized interventions long before the current DSM ASD phenotype is manifested using dyadic co-regulation of brainstem-informed autism markers.
34858139|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) is a heterogeneous group of neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by synaptic dysfunction and defects in dendritic spine morphology. In the past decade, an extensive list of genes associated with ASD has been identified by genome-wide sequencing initiatives. Several of these genes functionally converge in the regulation of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway, a conserved cascade essential for stem cell pluripotency and cell fate decisions during development. Here, we review current information regarding the transcriptional program of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in ASD. First, we discuss that Wnt/beta-catenin gain and loss of function studies recapitulate brain developmental abnormalities associated with ASD. Second, transcriptomic approaches using patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) cells, featuring mutations in high confidence ASD genes, reveal a significant dysregulation in the expression of Wnt signaling components. Finally, we focus on the activity of chromatin-remodeling proteins and transcription factors considered high confidence ASD genes, including CHD8, ARID1B, ADNP, and TBR1, that regulate Wnt/beta-catenin-dependent transcriptional activity in multiple cell types, including pyramidal neurons, interneurons and oligodendrocytes, cells which are becoming increasingly relevant in the study of ASD. We conclude that the level of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling activation could explain the high phenotypical heterogeneity of ASD and be instrumental in the development of new diagnostics tools and therapies.
34858132|a|Intrauterine viral infections during pregnancy by pathogens such as Zika virus, Cytomegalovirus, Rubella and Herpes Simplex virus can lead to prenatal as well as postnatal neurodevelopmental disorders. Although maternal viral infections are common during pregnancy, viruses rarely penetrate the trophoblast. When they do cross, viruses can cause adverse congenital health conditions for the fetus. In this context, maternal inflammatory responses to these neurotropic pathogens play a significant role in negatively affecting neurodevelopment. For instance, intrauterine inflammation poses an increased risk of neurodevelopmental disorders such as microcephaly, schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorder, cerebral palsy and epilepsy. Severe inflammatory responses have been linked to stillbirths, preterm births, abortions and microcephaly. In this review, we discuss the mechanistic basis of how immune system shapes the landscape of the brain and how different neurotropic viral pathogens evoke inflammatory responses. Finally, we list the consequences of neuroinflammation on fetal brain development and discuss directions for future research and intervention strategies.
34857938|a|
34857900|a|The gut is connected to the CNS by immunological mediators, lymphocytes, neurotransmitters, microbes and microbial metabolites. A mounting body of evidence indicates that the microbiome exerts significant effects on immune cells and CNS cells. These effects frequently result in the suppression or exacerbation of inflammatory responses, the latter of which can lead to severe tissue damage, altered synapse formation and disrupted maintenance of the CNS. Herein, we review recent progress in research on the microbial regulation of CNS diseases with a focus on major gut microbial metabolites, such as short-chain fatty acids, tryptophan metabolites, and secondary bile acids. Pathological changes in the CNS are associated with dysbiosis and altered levels of microbial metabolites, which can further exacerbate various neurological disorders. The cellular and molecular mechanisms by which these gut microbial metabolites regulate inflammatory diseases in the CNS are discussed. We highlight the similarities and differences in the impact on four major CNS diseases, i.e., multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, and autism spectrum disorder, to identify common cellular and molecular networks governing the regulation of cellular constituents and pathogenesis in the CNS by microbial metabolites.
34857368|a|OBJECTIVES: The behavioral summarized evaluation scales, the BSE and its revised version the BSE-R, were developed and validated in the 1980-1990s. The BSE-R is still used daily by clinical teams in France and foreign countries, and it is recommended by the French Health Authority (2018). Having taken into account knowledge improvement in neurodevelopment and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and the importance of observation by relatives in ecological context, the second version of the BSE was developed. This paper presents the construction and the validation study of the second version of the behavioral summarized evaluation scale, the BSE2 and the BSE2-P rated by parents. METHODS: Construct validity of the BSE2 scale has been studied in a population of 244 children and adolescents with ASD according to DSM-5 criteria, aged from 30 months to 18 years. Discriminant validity has been analyzed using a population of 86 patients of the same age, with neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) without comorbidity of ASD. RESULTS: BSE2 comprises 30 items and is a two-dimensional scale as was BSE-R. Both dimensions, labelled "Interaction" (11 items) and "Modulation" (11 items), accounted for 41.7 % of the total variance. They describe autism severity and are in accordance with the two DSM-5 dimensions. Internal consistency (0.927 and 0.850 respectively) and inter-rater reliability (0.932 and 0.897 respectively) are good or excellent for both dimensions. Sensibility and specificity (0.758 and 0.767 respectively) range BSE2 among the tools with good psychometric properties. The parent version, BSE2-P, dedicated to ecological context is easily rated by parents. CONCLUSIONS: BSE2 scale for children and adolescents is a clinical tool with good psychometric properties. Its two-dimensional structure is in accordance with DSM-5 criteria. This scale covers all spectrum of ASD clinical forms in both children and adolescents. It can be used to identify ASD in complex neurodevelopmental disorders with several comorbidities and can help to distinguish autism symptomatology from other neurodevelopmental diagnoses. Furthermore, this scale allows to expand the rating context, involving parents to define and adjust the individualized therapeutic project. Thus the BSE2 is a valuable clinical tool for practitioners for both diagnosis and follow-up.
34857060|a|OBJECTIVES: Lack of knowledge and discriminatory attitudes and behaviours towards individuals with mental disorders is a worldwide problem but may be particularly damaging for young people. This pilot study examined knowledge, attitudes and behaviours towards schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and autism within a large sample of adults in Ireland, a country with the youngest population in Europe, in order to better understand public views on these groups. METHODS: In a correlational, cross-sectional design, 307 adults in Ireland over the age of 18 completed a questionnaire over Google Forms examining knowledge, attitudes and behaviours towards schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and autism. Responses to questions specifically relating to each diagnosis were compared using trimmed mean ANOVA to examine whether responses to questions differed depending on diagnosis. RESULTS: Results indicate varied knowledge, attitudes and behaviours towards these groups, but a majority believe it should be a research priority. ANOVA and post hoc tests revealed significant differences in knowledge, attitudes and behaviours towards each of schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and autism (p < 0.005), and reported attitudes and behaviours towards schizophrenia were more negative than either bipolar disorder or autism. A majority of participants (54.8%) felt not informed enough about mental health by the media. CONCLUSIONS: In our Irish sample, type and level of stigma varies according to mental health diagnosis. Our sample also report feeling inadequately informed about mental health by the media. Thus future policy and campaigns could consider targeting individual mental health diagnoses, with a focus on increasing familiarity and knowledge.
34857047|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder defined by persistent deficits in social functioning and the presence of restricted and repetitive behaviours (RRBs). RRBs refer to four subtypes of behaviour including repetitive movements, speech, or use of objects; insistence on sameness; restricted interests; and sensory processing abnormalities. Many individuals with ASD also experience anxiety, which compounds ASD-related difficulties and inhibits daily functioning. RRBs have been found to be positively associated with anxiety; however, our understanding of the interplay between RRB subtypes and anxiety remains unclear. Thus, the current review aims to clarify the association between RRBs and anxiety by conducting a systematic review and meta-analysis. METHODS: To identify relevant studies, we will search five databases: CINAHL Plus, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, Ovid MEDLINE, PsycINFO, and Scopus. Articles included in the review will have their titles, abstracts, and full texts reviewed by two independent authors and their methodological quality assessed via the modified Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. Random-effects meta-analyses will then be conducted to calculate the pooled association between RRB subtypes and anxiety. Sensitivity analyses will also be conducted to assess the potential impact of bias, missing data, outliers, and methodological differences on this relationship. Additionally, this review will collate the factors which may influence the anxiety-RRB relationship to help identify who is most vulnerable to developing anxiety. DISCUSSION: This will be the first review to examine the association between the four subtypes of RRBs and anxiety in individuals with ASD. Understanding this relationship, and the factors associated with this, may help clinicians understand the different underpinnings and presentations of anxiety within this population with potential implications for assessment and treatment. SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: PROSPERO CRD42020185434.
34856862|a|OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the relationship between prenatal folic acid supplementation and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in 3-year-old offspring. METHODS: We used data from the Japan Environment and Children's Study, a nationwide prospective birth cohort study. We analyzed the data to determine the association between folic acid supplement use and the incidence of ASD in offspring, and classified participants into three groups based on the time of initiation of folic acid supplementation, as follows: (1) preconception users of folic acid supplements and (2) post-conception users, and (3) non-users. The dietary folate intake of study participants was also classified into three groups (<200 microg, 200 microg to <400 microg, >=400 microg). RESULTS: Overall, 361 offspring of 96,931 participants with single pregnancies were diagnosed with ASD (0.37%). A total of 7,046 participants (7.3%) used folic acid supplements before conception, 29,984 (30.9%) took them after detection of pregnancy, and 59,901 (61.8%) never received them. Multivariate logistic regression analyses demonstrated no association between prenatal folic acid supplementation and ASD in offspring (preconception use: adjusted odds ratio [AOR], 1.189; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.819-1.727 and post-conception use: AOR, 1.072; 95% CI, 0.840-1.368); additionally, no association was observed with the use of folic acid supplements and/or multivitamin supplements (preconception use: AOR, 1.273; 95% CI, 0.921-1.760 and post-conception use: AOR, 1.132; 95% CI, 0.885-1.449). Moreover, no significant association was observed in participants with combined prenatal supplement use and dietary folate intake. CONCLUSIONS: Maternal use of folic acid supplements from the pre- or post-conception period was not significantly associated with ASD in 3-year-old offspring in Japan. Evaluation of the dietary folate intake from preconception also showed no significant association.
34856637|a|BACKGROUND: Joint developmental trajectories of internalizing and externalizing problems show considerable heterogeneity; however, this can be parsed into a small number of meaningful subgroups. Doing so offered insights into risk factors that lead to different patterns of internalizing/externalizing trajectories. However, despite both domains of problems showing strong heritability, no study has yet considered genetic risks as predictors of joint internalizing/externalizing problem trajectories. METHODS: Using parallel process latent class growth analysis, we estimated joint developmental trajectories of internalizing and externalizing difficulties assessed across ages 4 to 16 using the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire. Multinomial logistic regression was used to evaluate a range of demographic, perinatal, maternal mental health, and child and maternal polygenic predictors of group membership. Participants included 11,049 children taking part in the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children. Polygenic data were available for 7,127 children and 6,836 mothers. RESULTS: A 5-class model was judged optimal: Unaffected, Moderate Externalizing Symptoms, High Externalizing Symptoms, Moderate Internalizing and Externalizing Symptoms and High Internalizing and Externalizing Symptoms. Male sex, lower maternal age, maternal mental health problems, maternal smoking during pregnancy, higher child polygenic risk scores for ADHD and lower polygenic scores for IQ distinguished affected classes from the unaffected class. CONCLUSIONS: While affected classes could be relatively well separated from the unaffected class, phenotypic and polygenic predictors were limited in their ability to distinguish between different affected classes. Results thus add to existing evidence that internalizing and externalizing problems have mostly shared risk factors.
34856309|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a group of neurodevelopmental conditions defined by behavioral deficits in social communication and interactions, mental inflexibility and repetitive behaviors. Converging evidence from observational and preclinical studies suggest that excessive repetitive behaviors in people with ASD may be due to elevated histaminergic H3 receptor signaling in the striatum. We hypothesized that systemic administration of pharmacological histamine H3 receptor antagonists would attenuate the expression of repetitive behaviors in the BTBR T+Itpr3tf/J (BTBR) mouse inbred strain, an established mouse model presenting autism-like repetitive behaviors and novelty-induced hyperactivity. We further aimed to investigate whether agonism of the histamine H3 receptor would be sufficient to induce repetitive behaviors in the C57BL/6J control mouse strain. METHODS: Different doses of H3 receptor agonists (i.e., (R)-alpha-methylhistamine and immethridine) and H3 receptor antagonists/inverse agonists (i.e., ciproxifan and pitolisant) were administered via intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection in male mice to characterize the acute effects of these compounds on ASD-related behavioral readouts. RESULTS: The highly selective H3 receptor agonist immethridine significantly increased the time spent in stereotypic patterns in C57BL/6J mice, but this effect appeared to be driven by general sedative properties of the compound. High doses of pitolisant significantly decreased locomotor hyperactivity in novel environments in BTBR mice, without significant effects on repetitive behaviors. CONCLUSIONS: Based on our findings, we conclude that acute H3 receptor manipulation mainly affected general motor activity levels in novel environments. Small changes in stereotyped behaviors were observed but appeared to be driven by altered general activity levels.
34856129|a|In this issue of Neuron, Chen et al. (2021) generated a mouse model for haploinsufficiency of MYT1L. MYT1L is widely used in neuronal reprogramming, and de novo mutations have been linked to a neurodevelopmental syndrome. Extensive characterization in this study better delineates MYT1L's role in transcriptional regulation and neuronal differentiation.
34856008|a|AIM: To conduct a bibliometric analysis of the top 100 most-cited papers in dentistry for individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders. METHODS AND RESULTS: A search strategy was constructed and conducted at the Web of Science in the category of "Dentistry, Oral Surgery, and Medicine". The following information was extracted from each paper: title, authorship, year of publication, title of the journal, study subject, study design, age range of sample participants, type of disability, institution, country and continent, number of citations and citation density. Google Scholar and Scopus were used to crosscheck the number of citations of the most-cited papers. The VOSviewer software was used to generate bibliometric network maps. The papers received 4453 citations in Web of Science, ranging from 30 to 106 citations. Most papers were published by the USA (35%), had an observational design (78%) and the main subject was epidemiology (31%). Most studies focused on individuals with Down syndrome (34%) and Autism Spectrum Disorder (18%) and were published in the Journal of Periodontology (10%) and the Pediatric Dentistry Journal (7%). CONCLUSION: Most of the studies included in this review were characterized as epidemiological studies. Future research should focus on behavior guidance, dental education, and access to dental services.
34855847|a|An unbiased, widely accepted estimate of the rate of occurrence of new cases of autism over time would facilitate progress in understanding the causes of autism. The same may also apply to other disorders. While incidence is a widely used measure of occurrence, birth prevalence-the proportion of each birth year cohort with the disorder-is the appropriate measure for disorders and diseases of early childhood. Studies of autism epidemiology commonly speculate that estimates showing strong increases in rate of autism cases result from an increase in diagnosis rates rather than a true increase in cases. Unfortunately, current methods are not sufficient to provide a definitive resolution to this controversy. Prominent experts have written that it is virtually impossible to solve. This paper presents a novel method, time-to-event birth prevalence estimation (TTEPE), to provide accurate estimates of birth prevalence properly adjusted for changing diagnostic factors. It addresses the shortcomings of prior methods. TTEPE is based on well-known time-to-event (survival) analysis techniques. A discrete survival process models the rates of incident diagnoses by birth year and age. Diagnostic factors drive the probability of diagnosis as a function of the year of diagnosis. TTEPE models changes in diagnostic criteria, which can modify the effective birth prevalence when new criteria take effect. TTEPE incorporates the development of diagnosable symptoms with age. General-purpose optimization software estimates all parameters, forming a non-linear regression. The paper specifies all assumptions underlying the analysis and explores potential deviations from assumptions and optional additional analyses. A simulation study shows that TTEPE produces accurate parameter estimates, including trends in both birth prevalence and the probability of diagnosis in the presence of sampling effects from finite populations. TTEPE provides high power to resolve small differences in parameter values by utilizing all available data points.
34855727|a|PROBLEM/CONDITION: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD). PERIOD COVERED: 2018. DESCRIPTION OF SYSTEM: The Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network is an active surveillance program that estimates ASD prevalence and monitors timing of ASD identification among children aged 4 and 8 years. This report focuses on children aged 4 years in 2018, who were born in 2014 and had a parent or guardian who lived in the surveillance area in one of 11 sites (Arizona, Arkansas, California, Georgia, Maryland, Minnesota, Missouri, New Jersey, Tennessee, Utah, and Wisconsin) at any time during 2018. Children were classified as having ASD if they ever received 1) an ASD diagnostic statement (diagnosis) in an evaluation, 2) a special education classification of ASD (eligibility), or 3) an ASD International Classification of Diseases (ICD) code. Suspected ASD also was tracked among children aged 4 years. Children who did not meet the case definition for ASD were classified as having suspected ASD if their records contained a qualified professional's statement indicating a suspicion of ASD. RESULTS: For 2018, the overall ASD prevalence was 17.0 per 1,000 (one in 59) children aged 4 years. Prevalence varied from 9.1 per 1,000 in Utah to 41.6 per 1,000 in California. At every site, prevalence was higher among boys than girls, with an overall male-to-female prevalence ratio of 3.4. Prevalence of ASD among children aged 4 years was lower among non-Hispanic White (White) children (12.9 per 1,000) than among non-Hispanic Black (Black) children (16.6 per 1,000), Hispanic children (21.1 per 1,000), and Asian/Pacific Islander (A/PI) children (22.7 per 1,000). Among children aged 4 years with ASD and information on intellectual ability, 52% met the surveillance case definition of co-occurring intellectual disability (intelligence quotient <=70 or an examiner's statement of intellectual disability documented in an evaluation). Of children aged 4 years with ASD, 72% had a first evaluation at age <=36 months. Stratified by census-tract-level median household income (MHI) tertile, a lower percentage of children with ASD and intellectual disability was evaluated by age 36 months in the low MHI tertile (72%) than in the high MHI tertile (84%). Cumulative incidence of ASD diagnosis or eligibility received by age 48 months was 1.5 times as high among children aged 4 years (13.6 per 1,000 children born in 2014) as among those aged 8 years (8.9 per 1,000 children born in 2010). Across MHI tertiles, higher cumulative incidence of ASD diagnosis or eligibility received by age 48 months was associated with lower MHI. Suspected ASD prevalence was 2.6 per 1,000 children aged 4 years, meaning for every six children with ASD, one child had suspected ASD. The combined prevalence of ASD and suspected ASD (19.7 per 1,000 children aged 4 years) was lower than ASD prevalence among children aged 8 years (23.0 per 1,000 children aged 8 years). INTERPRETATION: Groups with historically lower prevalence of ASD (non-White and lower MHI) had higher prevalence and cumulative incidence of ASD among children aged 4 years in 2018, suggesting progress in identification among these groups. However, a lower percentage of children with ASD and intellectual disability in the low MHI tertile were evaluated by age 36 months than in the high MHI group, indicating disparity in timely evaluation. Children aged 4 years had a higher cumulative incidence of diagnosis or eligibility by age 48 months compared with children aged 8 years, indicating improvement in early identification of ASD. The overall prevalence for children aged 4 years was less than children aged 8 years, even when prevalence of children suspected of having ASD by age 4 years is included. This finding suggests that many children identified after age 4 years do not have suspected ASD documented by age 48 months. PUBLIC HEALTH ACTION: Children born in 2014 were more likely to be identified with ASD by age 48 months than children born in 2010, indicating increased early identification. However, ASD identification among children aged 4 years varied by site, suggesting opportunities to examine developmental screening and diagnostic practices that promote earlier identification. Children aged 4 years also were more likely to have co-occurring intellectual disability than children aged 8 years, suggesting that improvement in the early identification and evaluation of developmental concerns outside of cognitive impairments is still needed. Improving early identification of ASD could lead to earlier receipt of evidence-based interventions and potentially improve developmental outcomes.
34855725|a|PROBLEM/CONDITION: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD). PERIOD COVERED: 2018. DESCRIPTION OF SYSTEM: The Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring (ADDM) Network conducts active surveillance of ASD. This report focuses on the prevalence and characteristics of ASD among children aged 8 years in 2018 whose parents or guardians lived in 11 ADDM Network sites in the United States (Arizona, Arkansas, California, Georgia, Maryland, Minnesota, Missouri, New Jersey, Tennessee, Utah, and Wisconsin). To ascertain ASD among children aged 8 years, ADDM Network staff review and abstract developmental evaluations and records from community medical and educational service providers. In 2018, children met the case definition if their records documented 1) an ASD diagnostic statement in an evaluation (diagnosis), 2) a special education classification of ASD (eligibility), or 3) an ASD International Classification of Diseases (ICD) code. RESULTS: For 2018, across all 11 ADDM sites, ASD prevalence per 1,000 children aged 8 years ranged from 16.5 in Missouri to 38.9 in California. The overall ASD prevalence was 23.0 per 1,000 (one in 44) children aged 8 years, and ASD was 4.2 times as prevalent among boys as among girls. Overall ASD prevalence was similar across racial and ethnic groups, except American Indian/Alaska Native children had higher ASD prevalence than non-Hispanic White (White) children (29.0 versus 21.2 per 1,000 children aged 8 years). At multiple sites, Hispanic children had lower ASD prevalence than White children (Arizona, Arkansas, Georgia, and Utah), and non-Hispanic Black (Black) children (Georgia and Minnesota). The associations between ASD prevalence and neighborhood-level median household income varied by site. Among the 5,058 children who met the ASD case definition, 75.8% had a diagnostic statement of ASD in an evaluation, 18.8% had an ASD special education classification or eligibility and no ASD diagnostic statement, and 5.4% had an ASD ICD code only. ASD prevalence per 1,000 children aged 8 years that was based exclusively on documented ASD diagnostic statements was 17.4 overall (range: 11.2 in Maryland to 29.9 in California). The median age of earliest known ASD diagnosis ranged from 36 months in California to 63 months in Minnesota. Among the 3,007 children with ASD and data on cognitive ability, 35.2% were classified as having an intelligence quotient (IQ) score <=70. The percentages of children with ASD with IQ scores <=70 were 49.8%, 33.1%, and 29.7% among Black, Hispanic, and White children, respectively. Overall, children with ASD and IQ scores <=70 had earlier median ages of ASD diagnosis than children with ASD and IQ scores >70 (44 versus 53 months). INTERPRETATION: In 2018, one in 44 children aged 8 years was estimated to have ASD, and prevalence and median age of identification varied widely across sites. Whereas overall ASD prevalence was similar by race and ethnicity, at certain sites Hispanic children were less likely to be identified as having ASD than White or Black children. The higher proportion of Black children compared with White and Hispanic children classified as having intellectual disability was consistent with previous findings. PUBLIC HEALTH ACTION: The variability in ASD prevalence and community ASD identification practices among children with different racial, ethnic, and geographical characteristics highlights the importance of research into the causes of that variability and strategies to provide equitable access to developmental evaluations and services. These findings also underscore the need for enhanced infrastructure for diagnostic, treatment, and support services to meet the needs of all children.
34855690|a|OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to characterize patterns of and factors associated with psychotropic medication use in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) receiving publicly funded mental health services. METHOD: Data were extracted from 202 children with ASD participating in a cluster randomized trial of An Individualized Mental Health Intervention for ASD conducted in 29 publicly funded mental health programs. Children with ASD were aged 5 to 13 years (M = 9.1 years, SD = 2.4), and were 84.2% male and 59.9% Latinx. Child ASD and cognitive functioning were determined by standardized assessment. Caregivers reported child psychotropic medication use, behavior problems, ASD symptom severity, mental health symptoms, family demographics, and caregiver strain at the baseline. RESULTS: Nearly half (49.5%) of participants used psychotropic medication(s) within the past 6 months, with stimulants being most commonly reported. Child co-occurring attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (B = 1.55, p < 0.01; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.53-2.57), lower cognitive functioning (B = -0.03, p = 0.02; 95% CI: -0.05 to <0.00), and non-Hispanic White ethnicity (vs Hispanic/Latinx; B = 1.02, p = 02; 95% CI: -1.89 to -0.14) were associated with a greater likelihood of using any type of medication. Factors associated with medication use varied by class: stimulants-ADHD, lower ASD symptom severity, and more intensive behavior problems; SSRIs-higher ASD symptom severity; alpha-2 agonists-ADHD, higher ASD symptom severity, lower cognitive functioning, and higher caregiver strain; and antipsychotics-none. CONCLUSION: The findings highlight factors associated with psychotropic medication use for a clinically complex population, which may inform community care improvement efforts.
34855204|a|We examined the association between gestational age and risk of any primary cancer and observed whether the risk patterns differed by sex, birth weight for gestational age categories, cancer site, and age of onset. All people live-born in Sweden 1974-2013 were prospectively followed up from birth until 2016 using national registers. Gestational age was extracted from the Medical Birth Register and primary malignant cancer diagnoses were from the Swedish cancer register. The adjusted hazard ratios (aHR) for any primary cancer according to weekly gestational age and gestational age categories were determined using cox proportional hazards models adjusted for birth year and parental age. The study included 3,137,691 people; 180,363 (5.8%) born preterm and 254,790 (8.1%) born post-term. They were followed up for 71,691,112 person-years, to a maximum of 43 years, and recorded 22,604 new cancers. Although aHRs for the pre-defined GA categories were only increased for moderate to late preterm delivery (aHR 1.07, 95%CI 1.01 to 1.14), gestational week-specific aHRs were increased for gestational weeks 30-35, with greatest aHR observed for 31 weeks (aHR 1.18, 95%CI 1.05 to 1.32). Increased cancer risk related to shorter gestational ages were observed particularly for women, those born small for gestational age, childhood cancers, and for cancers originating at certain sites (e.g., testicular and liver cancer). We provide the first evidence that those born between 30-35 weeks gestation may have increased risk of any primary malignant cancer up to young adulthood. Additionally, increasing gestational ages may reduce the risk of testicular and liver cancer. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
34855051|a|There is increasing evidence supporting the effectiveness of the Early Start Denver Model (ESDM) for children on the autism spectrum. However, substantial variability in response to the ESDM has been reported across participants. We examined the plausible yet untested hypothesis that variations in the fidelity level of therapists delivering the intervention contribute to variability in children's response to the ESDM. Videotaped sessions (n = 40) of toddlers on the autism spectrum who received the ESDM from trained therapists were coded to obtain measures of therapist fidelity and children's learning in response to the therapists' instruction. Variations in overall fidelity, along with variations in most items included in the ESDM fidelity checklist, contributed to the children's learning response during the sessions.
34854249|a|Evidence suggests that autistic adults have higher odds of developing several co-occurring conditions, but less is known about disparities by race and ethnicity in this population. Using 2008-2012 Medicaid Analytic eXtract (MAX) data, we (i) identify the prevalence of co-occurring conditions among the population of autistic adult Medicaid beneficiaries compared to a matched sample of those without an autism spectrum disorder (ASD) diagnosis, (ii) conduct logistic regression to estimate odds ratios for these health conditions predicted by an autism diagnosis, and (iii) estimate odds of having these health conditions as predicted by racial/ethnic group among the autistic population only. Overall, autistic adults did not have higher prevalence of some major health conditions (cardiovascular conditions, stroke, cancer, cardiovascular disease), but they did have higher odds of others (nutrition conditions, epilepsy, disorders of the central nervous system). Analysis by racial/ethnic group, however, shows that Black, Hispanic, and Asian autistic beneficiaries had higher odds of diabetes, hospitalized cardiovascular diseases, and hypertension, among other conditions. Policymakers should be aware that racial disparities found in the general population persist in the autistic population and should work to implement systems and programs to improve screening and preventive care for minority autistic populations. LAY SUMMARY: Autistic adults may have several co-occurring physical and mental health conditions, which could differ by racial/ethnic group. We find that, compared to the general Medicaid population, autistic adult Medicaid beneficiaries have elevated odds of some health conditions, like epilepsy and nutrition conditions, as well as some psychiatric conditions, such as anxiety and attention disorders. We also find that many of the same health disparities by racial/ethnic group in the general population persist among the autistic adult Medicaid population. For example, Black, Hispanic, and Asian Medicaid autistic beneficiaries have higher odds of diabetes, and Black and Hispanic autistic beneficiaries have higher odds of obesity and nutrition conditions than white autistic beneficiaries.
34854075|a|We examined the relationship between metaphor comprehension and verbal analogical reasoning in young adults who were either typically developing (TD) or diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). The ASD sample was highly educated and high in verbal ability, and closely matched to a subset of TD participants on age, gender, educational background, and verbal ability. Additional TD participants with a broader range of abilities were also tested. Each participant solved sets of verbal analogies and metaphors in verification formats, allowing measurement of both accuracy and reaction times. Measures of individual differences in vocabulary, verbal working memory, and autistic traits were also obtained. Accuracy for both the verbal analogy and the metaphor task was very similar across the ASD and matched TD groups. However, reaction times on both tasks were longer for the ASD group. Additionally, stronger correlations between verbal analogical reasoning and working memory capacity in the ASD group indicated that processing verbal analogies was more effortful for them. In the case of both groups, accuracy on the metaphor and analogy tasks was correlated. A mediation analysis revealed that after controlling for working memory capacity, the inter-task correlation could be accounted for by the mediating variable of vocabulary knowledge, suggesting that the primary common mechanisms linking the two tasks involve language skills.
34853960|a|Evidence of the effectivity of play-based interventions in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) was evaluated by PRISMA-based literature study and a Risk of Bias (RoB) assessment. Many of the 32 eligible randomized controlled trials (RCT) reported improved social interaction, communication, daily functioning and play behaviour. They also reported decreased problem behaviour, better parental attunement and parent-child interaction. We assessed 25/32 of the RCTs with high RoB, mainly related to homogeneity of the study population, lack of power, and performance bias. We concluded with due care that the effectivity of play-based interventions differed across RCTs, most reported improvements are found in ASD symptoms, everyday functioning, and parental attunement. In future research, findings should be replicated, taking account of the RoB.
34853959|a|The World Health Organization-Caregiver Skills Training Program, a parent-mediated early intervention facilitated by non-specialist providers piloted in urban India was evaluated using mixed-methods for feasibility and effects on child and caregiver outcomes. Caregivers (n = 22) of children (2-9 years) with social-communication delays participated in a single-group pre-post study. High rates of caregiver attendance, improved caregiver fidelity, and facilitator competency suggested program feasibility. Caregivers voiced acceptability of various intervention-components. The intervention was associated with improved caregiver-reported skills and knowledge (p < 0.00), reduction in stress (p = 0.03), improved child developmental outcomes on communication and social interaction (p < 0.00), and adaptive behaviors (p < 0.00). Challenges about logistics and availability of time were highlighted. Implications of results in resource-poor settings and recommendations for future feasibility trials are discussed.
34853958|a|OBJECTIVE: To characterize healthcare and behavioral service providers' transportation-related discussions with their autistic and non-autistic patients. METHOD: 78 providers completed a cross-sectional survey assessing their transportation discussions with patients. We used Mann-Whitney U tests and chi-square tests to compare differences in provider reports by patient diagnosis. RESULTS: Compared with one in two providers who reported they discuss transportation with non-autistic patients, only one in five have these conversations with their autistic patients. Few (8%) providers felt prepared to assess driving readiness in autistic patients, yet only a quarter refer patients elsewhere. CONCLUSION: There is a critical need to develop resources for use in medical settings to effectively support autistic adolescents' independence and mobility as they transition into adulthood.
34853957|a|
34853956|a|In autism spectrum disorder (ASD), medical conditions in infancy could be predictive markers for later ASD diagnosis. In this study, electronic medical records of 579 autistic individuals and 1897 matched controls prior to age 2 were analyzed for potential predictive conditions. Using a novel tool, the relative association of each condition in the autistic group was compared to the control group using logistic regressions across medical records. Generalized convulsive epilepsy, nystagmus, lack of normal physiological development, delayed milestones, and strabismus were more likely in those later diagnosed with ASD while perinatal jaundice was less likely to be associated. Lesser-known conditions, such as strabismus and nystagmus, may point to novel predictive co-occurring condition profiles which could improve screening practices for ASD.
34852926|a|BACKGROUND: The prevalence of autism spectrum disorder is increasing worldwide, making screening and early intervention necessary. Several screening instruments have been developed in recent years. The Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers Revised with Follow-up (M-CHAT-R/F) is considered to be one of the specific measures designed to identify toddlers at risk for autistic spectrum disorder. OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to translate and adapt the original version of M-CHAT-R/F from the English to the Moroccan Arabic language. STUDY DESIGN: Specialized translators and clinicians ensured forward and backward translation of the scale into Moroccan Arabic. Then, a two-stage screening of the M-CHAT-R/F-T was applied to a study sample comprised of 56 toddlers with autistic spectrum disorder (category I) and 96 toddlers with normal development (category II). "Kappa test", "Cronbach's alpha" test, the intra class correlation coefficient, and the area under the curve were determined. RESULT: The average score results of M-CHAT-R/F were 13.12 for category I, while it was 2.24 for category II. The Cronbach's alpha coefficient of the checklist was 0.929. The kappa values ranged from k=0.78 to k=0.97 with a confidence interval of 95% indicating good convergence. The intra-class correlation coefficient ranged from 0.97 to 0.99, which is excellent. The area under the curve in our study was 0.988, an excellent result. CONCLUSION: Efficiency of the Moroccan Arabic version of the MCHAT was demonstrated for screening in the general population.
34852743|a|In Oncology, comprehensive Omics and functional enrichment studies led to an extensive profiling of (epi)genetic and neurobiological alterations that can be mapped onto a single tumor's clinical phenotype and divergent clinical phenotypes expressing common pathophysiological pathways. Consequently, molecular pathway-based therapeutic interventions for different cancer typologies, namely tumor type- and site-agnostic treatments, have been developed, encouraging real-world implementation of a paradigm shift in medicine. Given the breakthrough nature of the new-generation translational research and drug development in Oncology, there is an increasing rationale to transfertilize this blueprint to other medical fields including Psychiatry and Neurology. To illustrate the emerging paradigm shift in neuroscience, we provide a state-of-the-art review of translational studies on the beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme (BACE) and its most studied downstream effector, neuregulin, which are molecular orchestrators of distinct biological pathways involved in several neurological and psychiatric diseases. This body of data aligns with the evidence of a shared genetic/biological architecture among Alzheimer's disease, schizoaffective and autism spectrum disorders. We engage in a speculative intellectual exercise gravitating around the BACE-related science, here used as paradigmatic case, to facilitating a forward-looking discussion about a potential first step towards the adoption of biological pathway-based, clinical symptom agnostic, categorization models in clinical Neurology and Psychiatry for precision medicine solutions. We draw a perspective whereby pathway-based therapeutic strategies could be catalyzed by high-throughput techniques, embedded in systems-scaled biology, neuroscience, and pharmacology approaches that will help overcome the constraints of traditional descriptive clinical symptom and syndrome-focused constructs in Neurology and Psychiatry.
34852737|a|Neurodegeneration is a syndrome that occurs through the loss of the neuronal system's structure and function. In the 21st century, major health issues are related to cognitive impairment and neurological disorders such as autism, learning disabilities, Huntington's, cerebral palsy, schizophrenia, Alzheimer's, neuromuscular, lateral sclerosis, and Parkinson's disease may be life-threatening. Various experimental and epidemiological studies reveal the risk factors associated with the disease, like oxidative stress, hypertension, antioxidant enzyme abnormalities, metabolic toxicity, advanced age, cytoskeletal abnormalities, genetic defects, autoimmunity, mineral deficiencies, and other vascular disorders. Various compounds have been screened for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases (NDs), but, due to their side effects, they have solitary symptomatic benefits. Phytochemicals play a crucial role in maintaining the chemical balance of the brain by affecting the receptor function of specific inhibitory neurotransmitters. This review highlights the importance of phytochemicals for neurodegenerative diseases, in particular the possible mechanism of action of these natural compounds used for the treatment.
34851771|a|ARHGEF9 encodes collybistin, a brain-specific guanosine diphosphate-guanosine-5'-triphosphate exchange factor that plays an important role in clustering of gephyrin and gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors in the postsynaptic membrane. Overwhelming evidence suggests that defects in this protein can cause X-linked intellectual disability, which comprises a series of clinical phenotypes, including autism spectrum disorder, behavior disorder, intellectual disability, and febrile seizures. Here, we report a boy with clinical symptoms of severe intellectual disability, epilepsy, and developmental delay and regression. Trio exome sequencing (trio-clinical exome sequencing) identified a novel hemizygous deletion, c.656_c.669delACTTCTTTGAGGCC (p. His219Leu fs*9), in exon 5 of ARHGEF9. This variant was not reported in either the Genome Aggregation Database or our database of 309 patients with neurodevelopmental disorders. Oxcarbazepine and levetiracetam reduced the frequency of the patient's epileptic seizures to a certain extent, but psychomotor developmental delay and developmental regression became more obvious with age. This case study seeks to report a de novo loss-of-function mutation of ARHGEF9, aiming to emphasize the genetic diagnosis of X-linked intellectual disability and further improve knowledge of the ethnic distribution of ARHGEF9 mutations.
34851684|a|More than half of children who have autism spectrum disorder (ASD) suffer from motor impairment. In a retrospective study, the authors investigated the effect of a body-mediated workshop with dance movement therapy (DMT) on the motor skills and social skills of children with ASD by comparing 10 autistic children aged 7 to 10 years who benefited from DMT with 10 autistic children in a control group. Scores on the Movement Assessment Battery for Children and the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale were compared. The body-mediated workshop had significant benefits for motricity, especially manual dexterity, and for relational skills. A body-mediated workshop may have a multimodal effect and requires transmodal training. Regarding the mechanisms that explain the benefits and the cascading effect, the roles of imitation and multimodal connections are important.
34851412|a|OBJECTIVES: We aimed to describe the intellectual ability and ratio of boys to girls with average or higher IQ within autism spectrum disorder (ASD) cases identified in a population-based birth cohort. We hypothesized that research-identified individuals with ASD would be more likely to have average or higher IQ, compared to clinically diagnosed ASD. We also hypothesized the male to female ratio would decrease as the definition of ASD broadened. METHODS: ASD incident cases were identified from 31 220 subjects in a population-based birth cohort. Research-defined autism spectrum disorder, inclusive criteria (ASD-RI) was based on Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision, autistic disorder (AD), Asperger Disorder, and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified criteria. Research-defined autism spectrum disorder, narrow criteria (ASD-RN) was a narrower definition based on Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision AD criteria. Clinical diagnoses of ASD were abstracted from medical and school records. Intellectual ability was based on the last IQ score or on documented diagnoses of intellectual disability if no scores available. Average or higher IQ was defined as IQ >=86. RESULTS: A total of 59.1% of those with ASD-RI (n = 890), 51.2% of those with ASD-RN (n = 453), and 42.8% of those with clinically diagnosed autism spectrum disorder (n = 187) had average or higher IQ. Within the ASD-RI and ASD-RN groups, boys were more likely than girls to have an average or higher IQ (62.0% vs 51.3% [P = .004] and 54.1% vs. 42.5% [P = .03], respectively). CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that nearly half of individuals with ASD have average or higher IQ. Boys with ASD are more likely to have average or higher IQ than girls. Patients with ASD and higher IQ remain at risk for not being identified.
34851408|a|
34851047|a|Converging lines of evidence seem to indicate reduced self-referential processing in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, processing of one's own face has rarely been investigated in the context of ASD. Thus, the aim of the present study was to elucidate the role of attentional biases in the processing of self- and other faces in ASD. To achieve this goal we presented participants with images of their own face, the face of a close-other, and famous and unknown faces in a Stroop-like paradigm. Participants (22 with ASD, 22 typically developing [TD]) were instructed to indicate the color of presented faces while EEG was recorded. Our event-related potential results clearly showed that self-face was associated with larger P3 amplitudes than all other faces in the TD group, thus indicating a strong attentional bias toward one's own face. In the ASD group, P3 to the self-face and the close-other's face did not differ, suggesting similar attentional biases in both cases. In line with these P3 findings, nonparametric cluster-based permutation tests showed an analogous pattern of results: significant clusters for the self-face compared with all other faces in the TD group, and no significant cluster in the ASD group. Overall, our findings revealed impaired attentional bias to one's own face and diminished self versus other differentiation in individuals with ASD. The similar neural underpinnings of the self-face and other faces supports previous findings indicating reduced self-prioritization among individuals with ASD.
34850618|a|BACKGROUND: Early detection of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) is essential given the under-reported cases in low- and middle-income countries. This first national representative survey was conducted to explore the prevalence of ASDs amongst 18 and 30 months in seven provinces in Vietnam. DESIGN AND METHOD: During 2017- 2018, a national cross-sectional and population-based survey for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) amongst 40,243 children aged 18 to 30 months was conducted in 7 provinces representing the socio-economic regions of Vietnam. M-CHAT was used to screen children and then confirmed by diagnostic assessment using DSM-IV criteria. RESULTS: The prevalence of ASDs amongst children aged 18 and 30 months in Vietnam was high (0.758% or 1 in 132 children). Urban setting, male gender, and hereditable genes were associated with ASD prevalence. CONCLUSION: ASDs amongst children aged 18 and 30 months in Vietnam tend to be increasing and are similar to this rate in other middle-income countries but lower than that in Western countries. This under-recognized public health problem amongst children should be addressed by early detection and intervention for families with affected children.
34850503|a|OBJECTIVE: Autistic people with eating disorders (EDs) may have special needs that are not met in standard ED treatment, raising the need for treatment adaptations to accommodate co-existing autism spectrum condition (ASC). Little is currently known about the nature of existing treatment options or adaptations for this population. We conducted a pre-registered systematic review to: (1) identify research articles describing existing interventions for patients with ED and comorbid ASC, and to critically review evidence of their clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness (Review 1); (2) review the impact of ASC comorbidity on ED clinical outcomes (Review 2). METHOD: Peer-reviewed studies published until the end of December 2020 were identified through a systematic search of the electronic databases: Medline, Embase, PsycINFO, Web of Science, CINAHL, Scopus and Cochrane Library. RESULTS: Only one clinical pathway of treatment adaptations (the 'PEACE' pathway) was identified in Review 1 with early evidence of cost-savings and favourable treatment outcomes. ASC characteristics were shown in Review 2 to have no direct impact on physical outcomes or ED symptoms, but could be associated with higher rates of comorbidities and greater use of intensive ED treatment. Additionally, patients with ASC characteristics may benefit more from individual sessions, rather than group sessions. CONCLUSIONS: Any new treatments or treatment adaptations may not directly impact on ED symptoms, but may be better able to support the complex needs of the ASC population, thus reducing subsequent need for intensive treatment. Future research is warranted to explore evidence of clinical and cost-effectiveness of interventions for this population.
34849872|a|L1CAMs are immunoglobulin cell adhesion molecules that function in nervous system development and function. Besides being associated with autism and schizophrenia spectrum disorders, impaired L1CAM function also underlies the X-linked L1 syndrome, which encompasses a group of neurological conditions, including spastic paraplegia and congenital hydrocephalus. Studies on vertebrate and invertebrate L1CAMs established conserved roles that include axon guidance, dendrite morphogenesis, synapse development, and maintenance of neural architecture. We previously identified a genetic interaction between the C. elegans L1CAM encoded by the sax-7 gene and RAB-3, a GTPase that functions in synaptic neurotransmission; rab-3; sax-7 mutant animals exhibit synthetic locomotion abnormalities and neuronal dysfunction. Here, we show that this synergism also occurs when loss of SAX-7 is combined with mutants of other genes encoding key players of the synaptic vesicle cycle. In contrast, sax-7 does not interact with genes that function in synaptogenesis. These findings suggest a post-developmental role for sax-7 in the regulation of synaptic activity. To assess this possibility, we conducted electrophysiological recordings and ultrastructural analyses at neuromuscular junctions; these analyses did not reveal obvious synaptic abnormalities. Lastly, based on a forward genetic screen for suppressors of the rab-3; sax-7 synthetic phenotypes, we determined that mutants in the ERK Mitogen-activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) pathway can suppress the rab-3; sax-7 locomotion defects. Moreover, we established that Erk signaling acts in a subset of cholinergic neurons in the head to promote coordinated locomotion. In combination, these results suggest a modulatory role for Erk MAPK in L1CAM-dependent locomotion in C. elegans.
34849195|a|Viruses are an underrepresented taxa in the study and identification of microbiome constituents; however, they play an essential role in health, microbiome regulation, and transfer of genetic material. Only a few thousand viruses have been isolated, sequenced, and assigned a taxonomy, which limits the ability to identify and quantify viruses in the microbiome. Additionally, the vast diversity of viruses represents a challenge for classification, not only in constructing a viral taxonomy, but also in identifying similarities between a virus' genotype and its phenotype. However, the diversity of viral sequences can be leveraged to classify their sequences in metagenomic and metatranscriptomic samples, even if they do not have a taxonomy. To identify and quantify viruses in transcriptomic and genomic samples, we developed a dynamic programming algorithm for creating a classification tree out of 715,672 metagenome viruses. To create the classification tree, we clustered proportional similarity scores generated from the k-mer profiles of each of the metagenome viruses to create a database of metagenomic viruses. The resulting Kraken2 database of the metagenomic viruses can be found here: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1615774 and is compatible with Kraken2. We then integrated the viral classification database with databases created with genomes from NCBI for use with ParaKraken (a parallelized version of Kraken provided in Supplemental Zip 1), a metagenomic/transcriptomic classifier. To illustrate the breadth of our utility for classifying metagenome viruses, we analyzed data from a plant metagenome study identifying genotypic and compartment specific differences between two Populus genotypes in three different compartments. We also identified a significant increase in abundance of eight viral sequences in post mortem brains in a human metatranscriptome study comparing Autism Spectrum Disorder patients and controls. We also show the potential accuracy for classifying viruses by utilizing both the JGI and NCBI viral databases to identify the uniqueness of viral sequences. Finally, we validate the accuracy of viral classification with NCBI databases containing viruses with taxonomy to identify pathogenic viruses in known COVID-19 and cassava brown streak virus infection samples. Our method represents the compulsory first step in better understanding the role of viruses in the microbiome by allowing for a more complete identification of sequences without taxonomy. Better classification of viruses will improve identifying associations between viruses and their hosts as well as viruses and other microbiome members. Despite the lack of taxonomy, this database of metagenomic viruses can be used with any tool that utilizes a taxonomy, such as Kraken, for accurate classification of viruses.
34848882|a|The mechanistic underpinnings of autism remain a subject of debate and controversy. Why do individuals with autism share an overlapping set of atypical behaviors and symptoms, despite having different genetic and environmental risk factors? A major challenge in developing new therapies for autism has been the inability to identify convergent neural phenotypes that could explain the common set of symptoms that result in the diagnosis. Although no striking macroscopic neuropathological changes have been identified in autism, there is growing evidence that inhibitory interneurons (INs) play an important role in its neural basis. In this Review, we evaluate and interpret this evidence, focusing on recent findings showing reduced density and activity of the parvalbumin class of INs. We discuss the need for additional studies that investigate how genes and the environment interact to change the developmental trajectory of INs, permanently altering their numbers, connectivity and circuit engagement.
34848572|a|In this review, the brain substrate underlying outstanding artistic ability was discussed from the viewpoint of "neuroaesthetics" and savant syndrome. Beauty is a multifaceted concept and is related to other multiple cognitive or affective functions, for which the medial orbitofrontal cortex is the hub and core region of the brain. The savant syndrome is known for outstanding and talented abilities including art despite otherwise severe brain dysfunction. The savant syndrome is usually classified into the essential savant observed in autism spectrum disorders and acquired savant often observed in dementia/degenerative diseases or focal brain damage. The paradoxical functional facilitation hypothesis may account for the savant syndrome, in which focal brain dysfunction may paradoxically enhance/facilitate functions in the other areas of the brain. This implication is important and useful in understanding the recovery/treatment of neuropsychiatric conditions.
34848499|a|Mutations in some cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) cause abnormal synapse formation and maturation, and serve as one of the potential mechanisms of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). Recently, DSCAM (Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule) was found to be a high-risk gene for autism. However, it is still unclear how DSCAM contributes to ASD. Here, we show that DSCAM expression was downregulated following synapse maturation, and that DSCAM deficiency caused accelerated dendritic spine maturation during early postnatal development. Mechanistically, the extracellular domain (ECD) of DSCAM interacts with neuroligin1 (NLGN1) to block the NLGN1-neurexin1beta (NRXN1beta) interaction. DSCAM-ECD was able to rescue spine overmaturation in DSCAM knockdown neurons. Precocious spines in DSCAM-deficient mice showed increased glutamatergic transmission in the developing cortex and induced autism-like behaviors such as social novelty deficits and repetitive behaviors. Thus, DSCAM might be a repressor that prevents premature spine maturation and excessive glutamatergic transmission, and its deficiency could lead to autism-like behaviors. Our study provides new insight into the potential pathophysiological mechanisms of ASDs.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT DSCAM is not only associated with Down syndrome but is also a strong autism risk gene based on large-scale sequencing analysis. However, it remains unknown exactly how DSCAM contributes to autism. In mice, either neuron- and astrocyte-specific or pyramidal neuron-specific DSCAM deficiencies resulted in autism-like behaviors and enhanced spatial memory. In addition, DSCAM knockout or knockdown in pyramidal neurons led to increased dendritic spine maturation. Mechanistically, the extracellular domain of DSCAM binds to NLGN1 and inhibits NLGN1-NRXN1beta interaction, which can rescue abnormal spine maturation induced by DSCAM deficiency. Our research demonstrates that DSCAM negatively modulates spine maturation, and that DSCAM deficiency leads to excessive spine maturation and autism-like behaviors, thus providing new insight into a potential pathophysiological mechanism of autism.
34848493|a|
34848383|a|Converging evidence from clinical and preclinical studies suggest fetal vulnerability to adverse prenatal exposures increase the risk for neuropsychiatric diseases such as autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia, and depression. Recent advances in fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have allowed us to characterize typical fetal brain growth trajectories in vivo as well as to interrogate structural and functional alterations associated with intrauterine exposures such as maternal stress, environmental toxins, drugs, and obesity. Here, we review proposed mechanisms how prenatal influences disrupt neurodevelopment, including the role played by maternal and fetal inflammatory responses. We summarize insights from MRI research in fetuses, highlight recent discoveries in normative fetal development using quantitative MRI techniques (i.e., three-dimensional volumetry, proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy, placental diffusion imaging, and functional imaging), and discuss how baseline trajectories are shaped by prenatal exposures.
34848339|a|BACKGROUND: Kawasaki disease (KD) is a common childhood acute inflammatory disease and potentially triggers a chronic inflammation. Although some researches have investigated neurodevelopmental consequences following KD, the findings have been inconsistent. This is the first population-based study targeted on KD and common psychiatric disorders. OBJECTIVES: We aimed to investigate the association between KD and psychiatric disorders and hypothesized that standard anti-inflammatory treatment by intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) may protect against development of psychiatric disorders. METHOD: We retrieved data from Taiwan's National Health Insurance Research database (NHIRD). Patients (n = 282,513) with psychiatric disorders (the case group) during 1997-2013 were included, and the control group was matched with age, sex, income and urbanization (1:1). We calculated the prevalence of KD in both groups and estimated odd ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) in the subgroup analyses for KD in conditions of age, severity, and common psychiatric comorbidity. RESULTS: Numbers of patients with KD were 460 in the cases and 380 in the controls (p = .006), and the crude OR of KD was 1.21 times greater (95% CI = 1.06-1.39, p = .006) in the case than the control groups. KD patients without IVIG treatment (n = 126) were higher in the cases than those in the controls (n = 54), with the OR of 2.33 (95% CI = 1.70-3.21, p < .0001). Subgroup analyses showed that KD survivors were at significant risk for autism spectrum disorders (ASD) (OR = 2.15, 95% CI = 1.27-3.65; p = .005) and attention deficit and hyperactivity disorders (ADHD) (OR = 1.19, 95% CI = 1.02-1.39; p = 0.03), and a trend of increased risk for anxiety disorders (OR = 1.36, 95%CI = 0.99-1.86; p = 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Patients with KD were more likely to have comorbid psychiatric disorders, including ASD and ADHD. Moreover, anti-inflammatory treatment with IVIG may have potential prophylactic effects against the development of psychiatric disorders.
34848147|a|The HERC protein family is one of three subfamilies of Homologous to E6AP C-terminus (HECT) E3 ubiquitin ligases. Six HERC genes have been described in humans, two of which encode Large HERC proteins -HERC1 and HERC2- with molecular weights above 520 kDa that are constitutively expressed in the brain. There is a large body of evidence that mutations in these Large HERC genes produce clinical syndromes in which key neurodevelopmental events are altered, resulting in intellectual disability and other neurological disorders like epileptic seizures, dementia and/or signs of autism. In line with these consequences in humans, two mice carrying mutations in the Large HERC genes have been studied quite intensely: the tambaleante mutant for Herc1 and the Herc2+/530 mutant for Herc2. In both these mutant mice there are clear signs that autophagy is dysregulated, eliciting cerebellar Purkinje cell death and impairing motor control. The tambaleante mouse was the first of these mice to appear and is the best studied, in which the Herc1 mutation elicits: (i) delayed neural transmission in the peripheral nervous system; (ii) impaired learning, memory and motor control; and (iii) altered presynaptic membrane dynamics. In this review, we discuss the information currently available on HERC proteins in the nervous system and their biological activity, the dysregulation of which could explain certain neurodevelopmental syndromes and/or neurodegenerative diseases.
34847976|a|The current study evaluated the separate and combined effects of bilingualism and Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) on informativeness and definiteness marking of referential expressions. Hebrew-speaking monolingual children (21 with ASD and 28 with typical language development) and Russian-Hebrew-speaking bilingual children (13 with ASD and 30 with typical language development) aged 4-9 years participated. Informativeness, indexed by referential contrasts, was affected by ASD, but not by bilingualism. Definiteness use was non-target-like in children with ASD and in bilingual children, and it was mainly predicted by children's morpho-syntactic abilities in Hebrew. Language-universal and language-specific properties of referential use are discussed.
34847887|a|BACKGROUND: Early identification of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) provides an opportunity for early intervention and improved developmental outcomes. The use of electroencephalography (EEG) in infancy has shown promise in predicting later ASD diagnoses and in identifying neural mechanisms underlying the disorder. Given the high co-morbidity with language impairment, we and others have speculated that infants who are later diagnosed with ASD have altered language learning, including phoneme discrimination. Phoneme learning occurs rapidly in infancy, so altered neural substrates during the first year of life may serve as early, accurate indicators of later autism diagnosis. METHODS: Using EEG data collected at two different ages during a passive phoneme task in infants with high familial risk for ASD, we compared the predictive accuracy of a combination of feature selection and machine learning models at 6 months (during native phoneme learning) and 12 months (after native phoneme learning), and we identified a single model with strong predictive accuracy (100%) for both ages. Samples at both ages were matched in size and diagnoses (n = 14 with later ASD; n = 40 without ASD). Features included a combination of power and nonlinear measures across the 10-20 montage electrodes and 6 frequency bands. Predictive features at each age were compared both by feature characteristics and EEG scalp location. Additional prediction analyses were performed on all EEGs collected at 12 months; this larger sample included 67 HR infants (27 HR-ASD, 40 HR-noASD). RESULTS: Using a combination of Pearson correlation feature selection and support vector machine classifier, 100% predictive diagnostic accuracy was observed at both 6 and 12 months. Predictive features differed between the models trained on 6- versus 12-month data. At 6 months, predictive features were biased to measures from central electrodes, power measures, and frequencies in the alpha range. At 12 months, predictive features were more distributed between power and nonlinear measures, and biased toward frequencies in the beta range. However, diagnosis prediction accuracy substantially decreased in the larger, more behaviorally heterogeneous 12-month sample. CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that speech processing EEG measures can facilitate earlier identification of ASD but emphasize the need for age-specific predictive models with large sample sizes to develop clinically relevant classification algorithms.
34847744|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Autistic adults face many barriers to receiving quality primary health care like clinics that are far away and sensory sensitivities. Real-time telehealth visits, called "virtual visits," are live video chats between the patient and provider. Virtual visits may minimize barriers to care for autistic adults. We wanted to describe advantages and disadvantages of using virtual visits for delivering primary health care for autistic adults. We interviewed 7 autistic adults and 12 caregivers of autistic adults who receive primary care through one clinic. Autistic adults and caregivers said advantages to virtual visits were that (1) patients were more comfortable at home, (2) patients could get health care while avoiding physical contact with other people during the pandemic, and (3) virtual visits were similar to or better than in-person visits. The disadvantages included that (1) there could be technology problems like grainy video, (2) the doctor could not physically examine the patient (e.g. look in ears), and (3) patients sometimes participated less in the virtual visit than they would in person. Virtual visits may be beneficial for autistic adults by eliminating travel to the clinic and avoiding stressful sensory stimuli. We recognize that virtual visits may not work for all patients or in all situations. However, our study shows that primary care virtual visits may be beneficial for autistic adults during and beyond the pandemic.
34847618|a|
34847616|a|
34847159|a|BACKGROUND: Microorganisms in oral cavity are called oral microbiota, while microbiome consists of total genome content of microorganisms in a host. Interaction between host and microorganisms is important in nervous system development and nervous diseases such as Autism, Alzheimer, Parkinson and Multiple Sclerosis (MS). Bacterial infections, as an environmental factor in MS pathogenesis play role in T helper 17(Th17) increase and it enhancing the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as Interlukin-21(IL-21), IL-17 and IL -22. Oral microbiota consists diverse populations of cultivable and uncultivable bacterial species. Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) is an acceptable method for identification of uncultivable bacteria. In this study, we compared the bacterial population diversity in the oral cavity between MS and healthy people. METHODS: From October to March 2019, samples were taken at Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences' MS patients center. A total of 30 samples were taken from MS patients and another 30 samples were taken from healthy people. Phenotypic tests were used to identify bacteria after pure cultures were obtained. DNA was extracted from 1 mL of saliva, and PCR products produced with primers were electrophoresed on polyacrylamide gels. RESULTS: The genera Staphylococcus, Actinomyces, Fusobacterium, Bacteroides, Porphyromonas, Prevotella, Veillonella, Propionibacterium and uncultivable bacteria with accession number MW880919-25, JQ477416.1, KF074888.1 and several other un-culturable strains were significantly more abundant in the MS group while Lactobacillus and Peptostreptococcus were more prevalent in the normal healthy group according to logistic regression method. CONCLUSION: Oral micro-organisms may alleviate or exacerbate inflammatory condition which impact MS disease pathogenesis. It may be assumed that controlling oral infections may result in reduction of MS disease progression.
34846321|a|PURPOSE/OBJECTIVES: Chatbots are automated conversation pathways that users can access through text message or email on smartphones or other connected devices. In care management, they can be used to monitor patients' health conditions or recovery from procedures. This article describes nurse care managers' experiences using chatbots in patient care, illustrated through two patient case reviews. Considerations for planning and implementing chatbot technology in care management settings are discussed. PRIMARY PRACTICE SETTING: This care management service is part of an accountable care organization that serves 582,000 patients in University Hospitals of Cleveland, Ohio. Care management focuses on patients with chronic conditions, recent hospital discharges, and other needs. Care managers comprise a centralized team as well as embedded staff in select primary care practices. FINDINGS/CONCLUSIONS: The two patient cases are exemplars from the care management program serving patients recently discharged from the hospital with ongoing chronic conditions that increase risk for readmission. Use of chatbots helped overcome obstacles to conventional care management outreach and resulted in improved outcomes and strong trusting relationships with the care managers. IMPLICATIONS FOR CARE MANAGEMENT PRACTICE: Patients who typically do not respond to other types of care manager outreach may respond to text message-based, asynchronous chatbot communication. Interpersonal relationships between care managers and patients can be strengthened by chatbot support. Chatbot technology tracks patients' progress and offers insights to patients and clinicians to facilitate earlier interventions when problems occur. Chatbots make frequent patient contact to collect and provide routine information, allowing care managers to spend more time on high-value interactions that require clinical judgment. Potential concerns about chatbots include effect on labor force, information security, health equity, and oversight of content.
34846164|a|Alterations to the gut microbiome have been reported between children with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) and typically developing (TD) children. Characterizing these differences has led to the proposal of new treatments for ASD, such as probiotic interventions and fecal matter transplants. However, no study to date has characterized the gut microbiome or metabolome in Pitt Hopkins syndrome (PTHS), a severe ASD with a high incidence of gastrointestinal (GI) disturbances such as constipation. Here, we surveyed the gut microbiome and metabolome in a cohort of PTHS individuals and their unaffected parents. We focused our analysis on Clostridium bolteae, a microbe previously associated with ASD known to chemically modify bile acids in the gut. PTHS individuals carry a higher load of C. bolteae than their parents as well as both ASD and non-ASD individuals from the American Gut Project cohort. Specific metabolites were associated with PTHS, including bile acids and sphingosines. With a metadata reanalysis tool, we found that PTHS-associated metabolites have previously been identified in inflammatory bowel disease and obesity patients. These results suggest microbial involvement in PTHS, but further research must be performed to clarify the exact mechanisms through which microbes may act. Furthermore, new associations between PTHS-specific metabolites and other conditions may lead to additional therapeutic options for PTHS individuals. IMPORTANCE GI disturbances in ASD such as severe constipation can be medically significant and often require medication. This is especially true for individuals with PTHS, suggesting that the gut microbiome may be involved in PTHS's pathology. Revealing associations between specific gut microbes and PTHS may allow the development of new therapeutics or the application of existing therapeutics to ease day-to-day challenges encountered by PTHS individuals. In this study, we characterized an association between C. bolteae and PTHS, in addition to metabolites linked to both PTHS and C. bolteae. We also identified other microbiome-involved medical conditions where PTHS-associated metabolites have been isolated. Utilizing common metabolites to identify conditions with similar phenotypes may suggest new therapeutic options for GI-related symptoms.
34846102|a|Recent developments suggest that autistic individuals require dynamic angry expressions to have a higher speed in order for them to be successfully identified. Therefore, it is plausible that autistic individuals do not have a 'deficit' in angry expression recognition, but rather their internal representation of these expressions is characterised by very high-speed movement. In this study, matched groups of autistic and non-autistic adults completed a novel emotion-based task which employed dynamic displays of happy, angry and sad point light facial (PLF) expressions. On each trial, participants moved a slider to manipulate the speed of a PLF stimulus until it moved at a speed that, in their 'mind's eye', was typical of happy, angry or sad expressions. Participants were shown three different types of PLFs-those showing the full-face, only the eye region, and only the mouth region, wherein the latter two were included to test whether differences in facial information sampling underpinned any dissimilarities in speed attributions. Across both groups, participants attributed the highest speeds to angry, then happy, then sad, facial motion. Participants increased the speed of angry and happy expressions by 41% and 27% respectively and decreased the speed of sad expressions by 18%. This suggests that participants have 'caricatured' internal representations of emotion, wherein emotion-related kinematic cues are over-emphasised. There were no differences between autistic and non-autistic individuals in the speeds attributed to full-face and partial-face angry, happy and sad expressions respectively. Consequently, we find no evidence that autistic adults possess atypically fast internal representations of anger.
34845940|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Research suggests a relationship between autism and anorexia nervosa. For example, rigid and inflexible behaviour, a preference for routine and social difficulties are seen in both conditions. In this study, we examined whether people with anorexia and people with autism show similarities in social attention (where they look while engaging in social interactions or watching a scene with people interacting). This could help us understand why people with anorexia and autism experience difficulties in social situations. Participants with either anorexia or autism, as well as participants with no mental health problems watched a video of a social scene while we recorded which parts of the scene they looked at with an eye-tracker. Participants also completed questionnaires to assess characteristics of autism. We found that autistic participants looked at faces less than typically developing participants. However, participants with anorexia did not show a similar reduction in attention to faces, contrary to our predictions. Autistic features were not related to attention in either group. The results suggest that autistic people may miss important social cues (like facial expressions), potentially contributing to social difficulties. However, this mechanism does not appear explain social difficulties in people with anorexia.
34845802|a|BACKGROUND: Treatment for adults who set fires relies upon valid and reliable assessment. Research is needed to ensure self-report measures are available for adults with neurodevelopmental disabilities and that they are robust. METHOD: Qualitative and quantitative data from three rounds of a Delphi exercise with practitioners and a focus group discussion with adults with neurodevelopmental disabilities were used to generate consensus about the accessibility of item adaptations made to the Fire Interest Rating Scale, Fire Attitudes Scale, and the Identification with Fire Questionnaire. RESULTS: Findings suggested the accessibility of current measures could be improved to better meet the needs of adults with neurodevelopmental disabilities and adaptations to all questionnaire items were needed. CONCLUSION: Following feedback, revisions to current measures were implemented leading to the development of the Adapted Firesetting Assessment Scale with improved accessibility for adults with neurodevelopmental disabilities.
34845656|a|Imbalance in dopamine (DA) signaling is proposed to play a potential role in the etiology of Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) since, as a neuromodulator, DA regulates executive function, motor activity, social peering, attention as well as perception and subjects with ASD often exhibit deficit in these traits. Level of DA in the synaptic cleft is maintained by dopamine transporter (DAT) and hence, to identify the role of DAT in ASD, we have analyzed four functional genetic variants, rs28363170, rs3836790, rs2652511, rs27072, in nuclear families with ASD probands. Subjects were diagnosed based on Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders and trait severity was assessed by Childhood Autism Rating Scale 2-Standard test. Informed written consent was obtained from the parents/care givers before recruitment followed by collection of peripheral blood for genomic DNA isolation. Target sites were investigated by PCR-based methods and data obtained was analyzed by population- as well as family-based statistical methods. Case-control analysis revealed significant higher frequencies of 9 repeat (9R) and 5 repeat (5R) alleles of rs28363170 and rs3836790 respectively in the ASD probands. Family-based analysis showed statistically significant higher paternal transmission of rs28363170 9R and rs2652511 T alleles. In the presence of rs28363170 9R, rs27072 C, rs3836790 6R6R, and rs2652511 CC variants, trait scores were higher. Studied variants showed independent as well as interactive effects, which varied based on gender of the probands. We infer that altered DA availability mediated through DAT may affect autistic traits warranting further in depth investigation in the field.
34845591|a|Neuroligin-3 (Nlgn3), a neuronal adhesion protein implicated in autism spectrum disorder (ASD), is expressed at excitatory and inhibitory postsynapses and hence may regulate neuronal excitation/inhibition balance. To test this hypothesis, we recorded field excitatory postsynaptic potentials (fEPSPs) in the dentate gyrus of Nlgn3 knockout (KO) and wild-type mice. Synaptic transmission evoked by perforant path stimulation was reduced in KO mice, but coupling of the fEPSP to the population spike was increased, suggesting a compensatory change in granule cell excitability. These findings closely resemble those in neuroligin-1 (Nlgn1) KO mice and could be partially explained by the reduction in Nlgn1 levels we observed in hippocampal synaptosomes from Nlgn3 KO mice. However, unlike Nlgn1, Nlgn3 is not necessary for long-term potentiation. We conclude that while Nlgn1 and Nlgn3 have distinct functions, both are required for intact synaptic transmission in the mouse dentate gyrus. Our results indicate that interactions between neuroligins may play an important role in regulating synaptic transmission and that ASD-related neuroligin mutations may also affect the synaptic availability of other neuroligins.
34845298|a|In this systematic review, we analyzed and evaluated the findings of studies on prosodic features of vocal productions of people with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in order to recognize the statistically significant, most confirmed and reliable prosodic differences distinguishing people with ASD from typically developing individuals. Using suitable keywords, three major databases including Web of Science, PubMed and Scopus, were searched. The results for prosodic features such as mean pitch, pitch range and variability, speech rate, intensity and voice duration were extracted from eligible studies. The pooled standard mean difference between ASD and control groups was extracted or calculated. Using I2 statistic and Cochrane Q-test, between-study heterogeneity was evaluated. Furthermore, publication bias was assessed using funnel plot and its significance was evaluated using Egger's and Begg's tests. Thirty-nine eligible studies were retrieved (including 910 and 850 participants for ASD and control groups, respectively). This systematic review and meta-analysis showed that ASD group members had a significantly larger mean pitch (SMD =  - 0.4, 95% CI [- 0.70, - 0.10]), larger pitch range (SMD =  - 0.78, 95% CI [- 1.34, - 0.21]), longer voice duration (SMD =  - 0.43, 95% CI [- 0.72, - 0.15]), and larger pitch variability (SMD = - 0.46, 95% CI [- 0.84, - 0.08]), compared with typically developing control group. However, no significant differences in pitch standard deviation, voice intensity and speech rate were found between groups. Chronological age of participants and voice elicitation tasks were two sources of between-study heterogeneity. Furthermore, no publication bias was observed during analyses (p > 0.05). Mean pitch, pitch range, pitch variability and voice duration were recognized as the prosodic features reliably distinguishing people with ASD from TD individuals.
34844388|a|PURPOSE: Wnt pathway is closely related to neurodevelopmental process associated with cognitive function. After administration of valproic acid to the pregnant mice, the effect of swimming exercise of pregnant mice on the memory, neuronal production, and apoptosis of pups was studied in relation with Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway. METHODS: On day 12 of pregnancy, mice were injected subcutaneously with 400-mg/kg valproic acid. The pregnant mice in the control with swimming exercise group and in the valproic acid injection with swimming exercise group were allowed for swimming for 30 minutes one time per a day, repeated 5 days per a week, during 3 weeks. Step-through avoidance task and Morris water maze task for memory function, immunohistochemistry for 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU)-positive cells and western blot for brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), Wnt, beta-catenin, Bcl-2 related X protein (Bax), B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2), cleaved caspase-3 were carried out. RESULTS: Maternal swimming exercise during pregnancy improved memory function, increased BDNF expression, and neuronal proliferation in the valproic acid injected pups. Maternal swimming exercise during pregnancy suppressed Wnt expression and phosphorylation of beta-catenin in the valproic acid injected pups. Maternal swimming exercise inhibited Bax and cleaved caspase-3 expression and increased Bcl-2 expression in the valproic acid injected pups. CONCLUSION: Maternal swimming exercise during pregnancy improved memory function by increasing cell proliferation and inhibiting apoptosis through Wnt/beta-catenin signaling cascade activation in the valproic acid injected pups. Maternal swimming exercise during pregnancy may have a protective effect on factors that induce autism in the fetus.
34843287|a|Prospection refers to the ability to mentally construct future events, which is closely related to motivation and anhedonia. The neural underpinning of impaired prospection in psychiatric populations remains unclear. We recruited 34 individuals with autistic traits (AT), 27 individuals with schizotypal traits (ST), 31 individuals with depressive symptoms (DS), and 35 controls. Participants completed a prospection task while undergoing functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). We found that regions of the "default mode network" including the medial frontal gyrus, the posterior cingulate cortex, the precuneus and the parahippocampus were activated; and regions of the "task-positive network" including the inferior parietal lobe, the inferior frontal gyrus and the precentral gyrus were deactivated during prospection in controls. Compared with controls, AT, ST, and DS showed comparable behavioral performance on prospection. However, reduced activation in anterior cingulate cortex and frontal gyrus was found in AT individuals relative to controls during prospection. ST individuals showed hyperactivation in the caudate relative to controls when processing positive emotion, while DS individuals and controls showed similar neural responses during prospection. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).
34843062|a|OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the prevalence of epilepsy and  electroencephalographic abnormalities in children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and determine their risk factors. METHODS: This cross-sectional study was conducted over one year in children with ASD aged between 3 and 14 y. Classification of epilepsy and routine electroencephalography (EEG) recordings were done for all the patients. Developmental and cognitive assessments were done using Developmental Profile 3. Children were divided into three groups: ASD with epilepsy, ASD with isolated electroencephalographic abnormalities, and ASD with neither epilepsy nor electroencephalographic abnormalities. RESULTS: One hundred children with ASD were enrolled. Epilepsy was reported in 23% and subclinical electroencephalographic abnormalities were documented in 8%. The most common seizure types were generalized-onset tonic-clonic (48%), focal-onset with impaired awareness (17%), and focal to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures (17%). In children with subclinical epileptiform discharges, focal abnormalities were most common (75%) and were maximally seen over the temporal region (50%). Subnormal intellect (88.6%) and abnormal global developmental score (82%) were noted in the majority of children. Female gender, abnormal neurological examination, and adverse perinatal events were significantly associated with epilepsy. Of these, female gender and adverse perinatal events were independent predictors of epilepsy. Isolated EEG abnormalities were significantly associated with abnormal neurological examination in comparison with autistic children without epilepsy/EEG abnormalities. CONCLUSION: Epilepsy is seen in up to one-fourth children with ASD. Female gender and adverse perinatal events are independent risk factors for epilepsy. Subclinical or isolated EEG abnormalities are associated with abnormal neurological examination.
34842855|a|Eye tracking provides a quantitative measure of eye movements during different activities. We report the results from a bibliometric analysis to investigate trends in eye tracking research applied to the study of different medical conditions. We conducted a search on the Web of Science Core Collection (WoS) database and analyzed the dataset of 2456 retrieved articles using VOSviewer and the Bibliometrix R package. The most represented area was psychiatry (503, 20.5%) followed by neuroscience (465, 18.9%) and psychology developmental (337, 13.7%). The annual scientific production growth was 11.14% and showed exponential growth with three main peaks in 2011, 2015 and 2017. Extensive collaboration networks were identified between the three countries with the highest scientific production, the USA (35.3%), the UK (9.5%) and Germany (7.3%). Based on term co-occurrence maps and analyses of sources of articles, we identified autism spectrum disorders as the most investigated condition and conducted specific analyses on 638 articles related to this topic which showed an annual scientific production growth of 16.52%. The majority of studies focused on autism used eye tracking to investigate gaze patterns with regards to stimuli related to social interaction. Our analysis highlights the widespread and increasing use of eye tracking in the study of different neurological and psychiatric conditions.
34842807|a|Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are associated with co-morbidities such as gastrointestinal (GI) symptomatology, which in the absence of known causes are potential indicators of gut microbiota that may influence behavior. This study's purpose was to explore relationships among clinical GI indicators-diet, abdominal pain, and stool status-and ASD symptom severity, specifically social and sensory symptoms. Participants were 33 children with ASD, 3 to 16 years. The Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS-2) and the Child Sensory Profile Scale (CSP-2) were used to appraise social and sensory symptomatology. Significant difference was found in overall SRS-2, t(31) = -3.220, p = 0.003 when compared by abdominal pain status using independent samples t-tests. Significant difference was observed for overall CSP-2, t(31) = -2.441, p = 0.021, when grouped by stool. The three clinical GI variables predicted overall SRS-2 score using multiple linear regression, F(3, 32) = 3.257, p = 0.036; coefficient for abdominal pain significantly contributed to the outcome. Findings contribute to the growing literature signaling the need to understand occurrence of GI symptomatology more deeply, and in consideration of diet status and its implications in the children's everyday lives, behaviors, and symptom severity.
34842751|a|Although people with autism are protected under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, there is little theoretical or practical effort to determine whether traditional pre-employment assessments unfairly impact autistic job seekers. Due to the lack of emphasis on social communication, game-based assessments (GBAs) may offer a way of assessing candidate ability without disadvantaging autistic candidates. A total of 263 autistic job seekers took one of two game-based assessment packages designed to measure cognitive ability. After comparing their results to 323 college-graduate job seekers in the general population, we found that performance on the GBAs was generally similar in both populations, although some small differences were detected. Implications for hiring decisions are discussed.
34842547|a|BACKGROUND: The spread of false medical information on the web is rapidly accelerating. Establishing the credibility of web-based medical information has become a pressing necessity. Machine learning offers a solution that, when properly deployed, can be an effective tool in fighting medical misinformation on the web. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to present a comprehensive framework for designing and curating machine learning training data sets for web-based medical information credibility assessment. We show how to construct the annotation process. Our main objective is to support researchers from the medical and computer science communities. We offer guidelines on the preparation of data sets for machine learning models that can fight medical misinformation. METHODS: We begin by providing the annotation protocol for medical experts involved in medical sentence credibility evaluation. The protocol is based on a qualitative study of our experimental data. To address the problem of insufficient initial labels, we propose a preprocessing pipeline for the batch of sentences to be assessed. It consists of representation learning, clustering, and reranking. We call this process active annotation. RESULTS: We collected more than 10,000 annotations of statements related to selected medical subjects (psychiatry, cholesterol, autism, antibiotics, vaccines, steroids, birth methods, and food allergy testing) for less than US $7000 by employing 9 highly qualified annotators (certified medical professionals), and we release this data set to the general public. We developed an active annotation framework for more efficient annotation of noncredible medical statements. The application of qualitative analysis resulted in a better annotation protocol for our future efforts in data set creation. CONCLUSIONS: The results of the qualitative analysis support our claims of the efficacy of the presented method.
34841973|a|Visual illusions are fascinating phenomena that have been used and studied by artists and scientists for centuries, leading to important discoveries about the neurocognitive underpinnings of perception, consciousness, and neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia or autism. Surprisingly, despite their historical and theoretical importance as psychological stimuli, there is no dedicated software, nor consistent approach, to generate illusions in a systematic fashion. Instead, scientists have to craft them by hand in an idiosyncratic fashion, or use pre-made images not tailored for the specific needs of their studies. This, in turn, hinders the reproducibility of illusion-based research, narrowing possibilities for scientific breakthroughs and their applications. With the aim of addressing this gap, Pyllusion is a Python-based open-source software (freely available at https://github.com/RealityBending/Pyllusion), that offers a framework to manipulate and generate illusions in a systematic way, compatible with different output formats such as image files (.png, .jpg, .tiff, etc.) or experimental software (such as PsychoPy).
34841926|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Technology has the potential to help people with various support needs live more autonomous lives. This includes autistic individuals. In this article, we look at how older autistic adults use technology in their daily lives. Past research examining technology use and autism has mainly focused on helping children to learn new skills. To date, very little research has been conducted looking at how to create and design technology for use by older autistic adults. This is concerning because older autistic adults will likely have supports needs that match or exceed those of similarly aged non-autistic individuals. In this article, we spoke to autistic adults over 50 years about their daily experiences and how they use technology. We identified some important ways that older autistic adults use technology in their daily lives, as well as a number of support needs and barriers to technology use. Based on the findings, we were able to provide some guidelines and recommendations for technology developers and service providers to assist with designing, creating and using technology with older autistic adults.
34841925|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Autism spectrum disorders (autism) are thought to be relatively common, with analyses estimating 1% in the population could meet diagnostic criteria. New services for adult diagnosis have been set up in Wales, UK; however, no studies have examined for the proportion of adults with autism in Wales. In this study, we take anonymised healthcare record data from more than 3.6 million people to produce a national estimate of recorded autism diagnoses. We found the overall prevalence rate of autism in healthcare records was 0.51%. The number of new-recorded cases of autism increased from 0.188 per 1000 person-years in 2001 to 0.644 per 1000 person-years in 2016. The estimate of 0.51% prevalence in the population is lower than suggested by population survey and cohort studies, but comparable to other administrative records. From 2001 to 2016, the number of autism services for adults has increased, and autism is more widely known in society, while concurrently in healthcare records, there was a >150% increase autism diagnoses in the years 2008-2016. An increasing number of diagnoses were among women and those aged over 35 years. This study suggests that while the number of people being diagnosed with autism is increasing, many are still unrecognised by healthcare services.
34841922|a|LAY ABSTRACT: It can be difficult for youth on the autism spectrum to get the services they need after they leave high school. Because of this, many studies have examined the different factors that are related to service access. These studies have shown that youth on the autism spectrum who belong to an underrepresented racial or ethnic group or whose families have lower incomes are less likely to receive the services that they need. However, it is difficult or impossible to change things like race/ethnicity or family income. It is important to also identify factors that might improve service access that we can change. One potential factor that fits into this category is parental advocacy activities. Using data collected from 185 parents of youth on the autism spectrum, we found that more parental advocacy activities were related to youth receiving more services, even after accounting for variables related to the functioning of the youth (e.g. whether they have an intellectual disability, their autism symptom severity) and demographic information about the family (e.g. state in which they live, parental race/ethnicity, and family income). Our findings suggest that building parental advocacy skills may be one important way to increase the number of services that youth on the autism spectrum receive as they transition to adulthood.
34841895|a|Aim: To determine small RNA expression changes in mouse placenta induced by bisphenol A (BPA) exposure. Methods: Exposing female mice to BPA two weeks prior to conception through gestational day 12.5; whereupon fetal placentas were collected, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 C. Small RNAs were isolated and used for small RNA-sequencing. Results: 43 small RNAs were differentially expressed. Target mRNAs were closely aligned to those expressed by thymus and brain, and pathway enrichment analyses indicated that such target mRNAs regulate neurogenesis and associated neurodevelopment processes. Conclusions: BPA induces several small RNAs in mouse placenta that might provide biomarkers for BPA exposure. Further, the placenta might affect fetal brain development through the secretion of miRNAs.
34841782|a|The human intestinal flora is a highly diverse ecosystem composed of trillions of bacteria. The imbalance of the flora is related to a variety of diseases. The intestinal flora interacts with the nervous system bidirectionally in many ways through the gut-brain axis. It causes neuroimmune inflammatory response, dysfunction of gut mucosa and blood-brain barrier, direct stimulation of the vagus nerve, spinal nerve of the enteric nervous system, and the neuroendocrine hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis, causing neurological disorders. The metabolites of the intestinal microbial community also play a role. This article summarizes the characteristics of the altered intestinal flora and intervention measures in autism spectrum disorder, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, Guillain-Barre syndrome, Alzheimer's disease, neuromyelitis optica, hepatic encephalopathy, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, schizophrenia, depression, chronic fatigue syndrome, Huntington's disease and stroke. The current research on intestinal flora is still in its infancy, and very few studies were carried out on causality and the underlying mechanisms, which prevents the development of precise flora-based clinical intervention measures. It is expected the research on intestinal flora would lead to novel approaches for treatment of some neurological disorders.
34841387|a|BACKGROUND: Angelman syndrome (AS) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder caused by the absence of functional UBE3A in neurons. Excess low-frequency oscillations as measured with electroencephalography (EEG) have been identified as a characteristic finding, but the relationship of this EEG finding to the symptomatology of AS and its significance in the pathophysiology of AS remain unknown. METHODS: We used correlations and machine learning to investigate the cross-sectional and longitudinal relationship between EEG spectral power and motor, cognitive, and language skills (Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, Third Edition); adaptive behavior (Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales, Second Edition); AS-specific symptoms (AS Clinical Severity Scale); and the age of epilepsy onset in a large sample of children (age: 1-18 years) with AS due to a chromosomal deletion of 15q11-q13 (45 individuals with 72 visits). RESULTS: We found that after accounting for age differences, participants with stronger EEG delta-band abnormality had earlier onset of epilepsy and lower performance scores across symptom domains including cognitive, motor, and communication. Combing spatial and spectral information beyond the delta frequency band increased the cross-sectional association with clinical severity on average by approximately 45%. Furthermore, we found evidence for longitudinal correlations of EEG delta-band power within several performance domains, including the mean across Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, Third Edition, scores. CONCLUSIONS: Our results show an association between EEG abnormalities and symptom severity in AS, underlining the significance of the former in the pathophysiology of AS. Furthermore, our work strengthens the rationale for using EEG as a biomarker in the development of treatments for AS, a concept that may apply more generally to neurodevelopmental disorders.
34840866|a|Objectives: To determine the neurodevelopmental outcomes of very-low-birth-weight infants (VLBWIs, birth weight <1,500 g) after 9 years of follow-up. Methods: This study prospectively recruited 224 VLBWIs born from 2003 to 2009 in Kyushu University Hospital, Japan. Comorbidities of neurocognitive impairment, epilepsy, and autism spectrum disorder or attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ASD/ADHD) were assessed at age 3, 6, and 9 years. Results: Neurodevelopmental profiles were obtained from 185 (83%), 150 (67%), and 119 (53%) participants at age 3, 6, and 9 years, respectively. At age 9 years, 25 (21%) VLBWIs showed intelligence quotient (IQ) <70, 11 (9%) developed epilepsy, and 14 (12%) had a diagnosis of ASD/ADHD. The prevalence of epilepsy was higher in children with an IQ <70 at age 9 years than in those with an IQ >=70 (44% vs 0%). In contrast, ASD/ADHD appeared at similar frequencies in children with an IQ <70 (16%) and >=70 (11%). Perinatal complications and severe brain lesions on MRI were considered common perinatal risks for developmental delay and epilepsy but not for ASD/ADHD. Male sex was identified as a unique risk factor for ASD/ADHD. Conclusion: These data suggest that VLBWIs showed a higher prevalence of developmental delay, epilepsy, and ASD/ADHD at age 9 years than the general population. Distinct mechanisms might be involved in the pathogenic process of ASD/ADHD from those of developmental delay and epilepsy.
34840315|a|OBJECTIVES: Parent-report screening tools for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are widely used to promote early identification of children with or at risk for ASD. Most screening tools have been developed in English in the United States or United Kingdom; thus, translated versions are needed for use with culturally and linguistically diverse populations. Traditional translation methods include a forward translation, back translation, and review. However, when used in new cultural and linguistic contexts, this "forward-back" approach may have limitations, including differing psychometric properties compared with original instruments. This study presents a psychometric analysis of the forward-back translation methodology of an ASD screening tool. METHODS: A retrospective chart review design was used to examine Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers-Revised (M-CHAT-R; Robins et al.) records from 2974 toddlers. Data were compared between caregivers who completed the original English M-CHAT-R and caregivers who completed its forward-back "Spanish-Western Hemisphere" translation to compare select psychometric properties of the 2 instruments. RESULTS: Significant differences were observed between the 2 versions, including a higher overall risk score, higher initial screen-positive rate, and increased likelihood of leaving items blank among Spanish-speaking respondents. CONCLUSION: Traditional translation methods seemed to affect select psychometric properties between translations of the M-CHAT-R. A more rigorous cultural adaptation approach may be necessary to maintain equivalence with the original instrument. Until new rigorous translations are available, it is recommended that language-specific screening tools continue to be used, along with recommended follow-up interviews, to avoid exacerbating existing health disparities.
34840252|a|CASE: S is a 12-year-old boy with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), seizure disorder, cerebral palsy, and intellectual disability who presented to the primary care clinician for a preventative care visit.S was born at full term after an unremarkable pregnancy. His developmental delays were first noted at around 8 months, when he could not sit independently and had intermittently poor eye contact. He was referred to Part C Early Intervention and subsequently evaluated by a neurodevelopmental pediatrician, where he was noted to be hypotonic, with delayed motor and cognitive skills. Initial genetics evaluation included karyotype, fragile X testing, Angelman and Prader-Willi DNA fluorescence in situ hybridization probes, POLG sequencing, MECP2 testing, a microarray, creatinine kinase, very long-chain fatty acids, lymphocyte arylsulfatase, urine organic acids, and plasma amino acids, all of which were normal.As time progressed, S continued to have motor and communication delays and developed choreic movements. He also developed episodes concerning for seizure, including periods of staring while awake and episodes of extremity shaking lasting a few seconds with associated eye deviation, which eventually progressed to generalized seizures. He also developed periods of lethargy. Outpatient workup included several EEGs, which were notable for foci in the right frontal and left temporal regions. He has had several brain MRIs showing generalized volume loss and had critical laboratory tests during a period of lethargy, which were unconcerning. He was treated with multiple antiseizure medications. He was diagnosed with ASD at age 5 years because of delayed language, poor social communication, and repetitive behaviors.Over time, S continued to experience global developmental delays and autistic-like behaviors and remained minimally verbal. However, clinicians noted a number of developmental strengths, including a generally positive mood, a willingness to participate in therapy, improved receptive language skills, attachment to his mother, and a love of nature and the outdoors. He participated in a number of therapy modalities including speech/language therapy, occupational therapy, physical therapy, applied behavioral analysis, aqua therapy, partner-assisted scanning, and therapeutic horseback riding.In 2019, whole-exome sequencing was newly covered by the state Medicaid program, and testing was obtained in 2020. Whole-exome sequencing revealed a de novo STXBP1 pathogenic variant c.874C>T (p.Arg292Cys), which is associated with developmental and epileptic encephalopathy. His presentation is consistent with STXBP1 encephalopathy including refractory epilepsy, ASD, intellectual disability, and movement disorders.What are important considerations in genetic testing for children with autism? How does a genetic testing result alter management for clinicians and families?
34839521|a|Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS) (OMIM #182290) is a rare genetic disorder with a prevalence of 1 in 25 000 live births. Approximately 90% of SMS patients have harbored a 3.7 Mb interstitial 17p11.2 deletion involving the RAI1 gene, while 10% of cases have carried pathogenic variants of the RAI1 gene. SMS is characterized by sleep disturbance, intellectual impairment, developmental delay, craniofacial and cardiovascular anomalies, obesity, self injury, aggressive and autistic-like behaviors. Most SMS patients have sleep disorders such as short total sleep time, frequent night waking, short sleep onset, and early morning waking. The sleep disturbance may aggravate with age and persist throughout life. Three mechanisms have been delineated. The first concern was the abnormal secretion of melatonin, with high levels during daytime and low levels at night. Evaluation of the integrity of the intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cell (ipRGC)/melanopsin system has found that SMS patients showed dysfunction in the sustained component of the pupillary light responses to blue light. Synchronization of daily melatonin profile and its photoinhibition are dependent on the activation of melanopsin. Dysfunction of the retina-melanin system may be one of the causes of melatonin spectrum disorders. Secondly, dysregulation of circadian rhythm gene expression has also been noted in mice and SMS patients. Finally, there may be association between sleep deprivation symptoms and DNA methylation patterns, which has provided new insights for SMS-associated sleep disorders and symptoms alike. Treatment for SMS-related sleep disorders is administered primarily through medications like melatonin tablets, which can alleviate insomnia-related sleep difficulties, in particular externalizing behavior in children. Researchers are also actively exploring other treatments for SMS currently.
34839513|a|OBJECTIVE: To study the genetic variants of a child with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) combined with epilepsy, and explore its possible pathogenic mechanism. METHODS: Clinical data of the child were collected and evaluated, whole-exome sequencing (WES) technology was used to explore the genetic variants sites of the child and his parents and candidate genes were filtered out. Sanger sequencing were performed to verify the variants identified by WES and PolyPhen2 was utilized to predict the function of these variants. qPCR was carry out to determine the expression of the variant gene. RESULTS: The proband carried a compound heterozygous mutation in the SIK3 gene (Chr11 q23.3, NM_025164.6), which contains a missense mutation c.1295A>G (p.N432S) inherited from the father and a deletion [c.2389_2391del(p.797del)] inherited from the mother. Both mutation sites are highly conservative, and PolyPhen2 predicted (c.1295A>G [p.N432S]) to be harmful. Compared to the mother, expression of SIK3in mRNA level in the peripheral blood of the proband and his father were both significantly decreased; compared to normal child, SIK3 expression in the peripheral blood of the proband and two other children with ASD were all decreased significantly too. In addition, studies on mice found that Sik3 gene has a marked higher level of expression in the brain. CONCLUSION: The SIK3 gene variants may probably be associated with ASD. The detailed mechanism needs to be studied further, which may involve lipid metabolism dysfunction in the brain.
34839505|a|OBJECTIVE: To analyze the clinical features and genetic basis of three children with mental retardation, language impairment and autistic features due to de novo variants of FOXP1 gene. METHODS: Clinical data of the children were collected.Trio-whole exome sequencing was carried out for the children and their parents. Pathogenicity of the variants was analyzed through bioinformatics prediction. RESULTS: All of the children had various degrees of mental retardation in conjunct with language deficit, global developmental delay, abnormal behavior and peculiar facial features, among whom two also developed autism spectrum disorders. The results of genetic testing showed that all three children harbored de novo variants of the FOXP1 gene, namely c.613_c.614delCTinsTA, c.1248delC and c.1393A>G. Two of these were frameshift variants and one was missense variant, which were all rated as pathogenic based on the guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG). Database search suggested that c.613_c.614delCTinsTA and c.1248delC were unreported previously. CONCLUSION: For the three children from unrelated families with mental retardation in conjunct with language deficit, global growth delay, abnormal behavior and peculiar facial features, the c.613_ c. 614delCTinsTA, c.1248delC and c.1393A>G variants of the FOXP1 gene may be the pathogenic factors. Above cases have further expanded the genotype-phenotype profile of FOXP1 deficiency syndrome.
34839218|a|Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a genetic disorder caused by mutations on the TSC1/TSC2 genes, which result in alterations in molecular signalling pathways involved in neurogenesis and hamartomas in the brain and other organs. TSC carries a high risk for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), although the reasons for this are unclear. One proposal is that TSC-related alterations in molecular signalling during neurogenesis lead to atypical development of neural networks, which are involved in the occurrence of ASD and ADHD in TSC. We investigated this proposal in young people with TSC who have been studied longitudinally since their diagnosis in childhood. Electroencephalography (EEG) was used to examine oscillatory connectivity in functional neural networks and local and global network organisation during three tasks (resting-state, attentional and inhibitory control Go/Nogo task, upright and inverted face processing task) in participants with TSC (n = 48) compared to an age- and sex-matched group of typically developing Controls (n = 20). Compared to Controls, the TSC group showed hypoconnected neural networks in the alpha frequency during the resting-state and in the theta and alpha frequencies during the Go/Nogo task (P <= .008), as well as reduced local network organisation in the theta and alpha frequencies during the Go/Nogo task (F = 3.95, P = .010). There were no significant group differences in network metrics during the face processing task. Increased connectivity in the hypoconnected alpha-range resting-state network was associated with greater ASD and inattentive ADHD symptoms (rho>=.40, P <= .036). Reduced local network organisation in the theta-range during the Go/Nogo task was significantly associated with higher hyperactive/impulsive ADHD symptoms (rho = -.43, P = .041). These findings suggest that TSC is associated with widespread hypoconnectivity in neural networks and support the proposal that altered network function may be involved in the co-occurrence of ASD and ADHD in TSC.
34839135|a|INTRODUCTION: Outcomes following intracapsular tonsillectomy (IT) have not been well established in children with developmental delays. The objective of this study was to compare outcomes and complications between intracapsular and extracapsular tonsillectomy (TT) in pediatric patients with developmental delay (DD) in comparison to non-developmentally delayed children. METHODS: This is a retrospective study of pediatric patients with DD undergoing tonsillectomy between 2016 and 2019 at a tertiary care hospital. This group included patients with Down Syndrome, Autism Spectrum Disorder, other genetic syndromes, and patients with a diagnosis of global developmental delay. Outcomes and complications were analyzed for IT and TT. RESULTS: 2267 charts were reviewed, and 320 patients were identified with DD. Of those, 72 patients underwent IT and 248 underwent TT. In the DD cohort, the IT group had a shorter length of stay (0.97 vs 1.7 days, p < .0001) and was less likely to receive post-operative narcotic medication (2.8% vs 35%, p < .0001) and corticosteroids (9.7% vs 64%, p < .0001) during their hospital stay. Reductions in emergency room (ER) visits (5.6% vs 10%, p = .21) and post-op bleeding (PTH) (1.4% vs 4.8%, p = .31) for IT vs TT were not statistically significant in the DD group. In the NDD group, fewer patients undergoing IT returned to the ER (11% vs 2.3%, p < .0001) or had PTH (4.8% vs 0.25%, p, 0.0001) as compared to those children undergoing TT. There was no difference between parental report of symptom improvement between the groups (39% vs 33%, p = .39). Analysis of 180 patients with preoperative and postoperative sleep study data revealed post-op Apnea Hypopnea Index (AHI) improved with both techniques (74% TT vs 79% IT, p = .7). There were no differences noted for persistent obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) among the two techniques for both study groups (p = .63). CONCLUSION: Children with DD undergoing IT have reduced length of stay and reduced inpatient administration of post-operative opioids and steroids. IT has comparable efficacy to TT in treating symptoms of pediatric sleep apnea with a better safety profile. Overall, children undergoing IT return to the operating room less frequently than those undergoing TT. Longer follow-up studies will be needed to evaluate rate of tonsil regrowth, risk of revision surgery and persistence of OSA in these patients.
34838692|a|OBJECTIVE: Early identification can improve outcomes for children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We sought to assess changes in early ASD identification over time and by co-occurring intellectual disability (ID) and race/ethnicity. METHOD: Using data for 2002 through 2016 from a biennial population-based ASD surveillance program among 8-year-old children in the United States, we defined identification as a child's earliest recorded ASD diagnosis or special education eligibility. Unidentified children had characteristics meeting the ASD surveillance case definition but no recorded identification by age 8 years. We calculated median age at identification among identified children, median age at identification including unidentified children, and cumulative incidence of identification by age 48 months. RESULTS: ASD identification by age 48 months was four times (95% CI: 3.6-4.3) as likely in 2016 as 2002, with the largest increases among children without ID. Median age at ASD identification among identified children decreased 3 months during this time. Children of every race/ethnicity were more likely to be identified over time. There were racial disparities stratified by ID: in 2016, Black and Hispanic children without ID were less likely to be identified with ASD than White children (both groups risk ratio: 0.7; 95% CI: 0.5-0.8), but Black children were 1.5 times (95% CI:1.3-1.9) as likely as White children to be identified with ASD and ID. CONCLUSION: Substantial progress has been made to identify more children with ASD early, despite minimal decrease in median age at diagnosis. Considerable disparities remain in early ASD identification by race/ethnicity and co-occurring intellectual disability.
34838666|a|This review provides an overview of the synaptic dysfunction of neuronal circuits and the ensuing behavioral alterations caused by mutations in autism spectrum disorder (ASD)-linked genes directly or indirectly affecting the postsynaptic neuronal compartment. There are plenty of ASD risk genes, that may be broadly grouped into those involved in gene expression regulation (epigenetic regulation and transcription) and genes regulating synaptic activity (neural communication and neurotransmission). Notably, the effects mediated by ASD-associated genes can vary extensively depending on the developmental time and/or subcellular site of expression. Therefore, in order to gain a better understanding of the mechanisms of disruptions in postsynaptic function, an effort to better model ASD in experimental animals is required to improve standardization and increase reproducibility within and among studies. Such an effort holds promise to provide deeper insight into the development of these disorders and to improve the translational value of preclinical studies.
34838473|a|OBJECTIVES: This study aims to assess the health care provider (HCP) perception and knowledge about vaccination and to determine the presence of hesitancy toward it. METHODS: An observational study on HCPs was conducted in King Abdullah Specialized Children's Hospital (KASCH), Saudi Arabia using a questionnaire. The HCPs were categorized as physicians, nurses, and allied health care specialists with total participants of 344. RESULTS: 24% expressed disagreement with the vaccination schedule required by the Saudi Ministry of Health and 17% expressed reluctance in recommending or receiving vaccines in general. There was an apparent reluctance toward the influenza vaccination among allied health care specialists compared to nurses and physicians (42.5% vs 6% vs 11.8% respectively, p = <0.0001). Furthermore, 6% of the HCPs stated they believe of a strong correlation between GBS and the seasonal influenza vaccine, and 8% expressed an association between measles vaccine and autism. Years of experience significantly implicated HCP perceived confidence in explaining vaccine safety and efficacy. HCPs with less experience expressed a lack of confidence in the matter compared to their colleagues with more experience (20.9% vs. 10.7%, respectively, p = 0.0262). CONCLUSIONS: HCPs' confidence in vaccination are essential in influencing their patients. Therefore, it is essential to improve the knowledge and awareness of vaccination among HCPs.
34838103|a|BACKGROUND: Retrotransposons have been implicated as causes of Mendelian disease, but their role in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has not been systematically defined, because they are only called with adequate sensitivity from whole genome sequencing (WGS) data and a large enough cohort for this analysis has only recently become available. RESULTS: We analyzed WGS data from a cohort of 2288 ASD families from the Simons Simplex Collection by establishing a scalable computational pipeline for retrotransposon insertion detection. We report 86,154 polymorphic retrotransposon insertions-including > 60% not previously reported-and 158 de novo retrotransposition events. The overall burden of de novo events was similar between ASD individuals and unaffected siblings, with 1 de novo insertion per 29, 117, and 206 births for Alu, L1, and SVA respectively, and 1 de novo insertion per 21 births total. However, ASD cases showed more de novo L1 insertions than expected in ASD genes. Additionally, we observed exonic insertions in loss-of-function intolerant genes, including a likely pathogenic exonic insertion in CSDE1, only in ASD individuals. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest a modest, but important, impact of intronic and exonic retrotransposon insertions in ASD, show the importance of WGS for their analysis, and highlight the utility of specific bioinformatic tools for high-throughput detection of retrotransposon insertions.
34838046|a|
34838037|a|BACKGROUND: Depression imposes immense public health burden, demonstrating an urgent need of the identification of modifiable risk factors. Only a few cohort studies have analyzed the association between Mediterranean dietary pattern (MDP) and depression but with mixed results. We examined the impact of MDP on clinically ascertained depression in a large population-based dataset. METHODS: In 1991/92, detailed information on diet, using a food frequency questionnaire, and potential confounding factors (body weight, height, educational attainment, smoking, previous diabetes and hypertension, and physical activity) was collected, in a random sample of 49,261 Swedish women aged 29-49. Adherence to MDP was calculated. Clinical depression was extracted from the National Patient Register. Study participants were followed up through 2012. RESULTS: During an average follow-up of 20.4 years, 1677 incident cases of depression were diagnosed. We observed a lower risk of depression for medium (score 4-5) and high (6-9) adherence to MDP, compared with low (0-3) adherence (Medium: hazard ratio (HR) = 0.90, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.81-1.00; High: HR = 0.82, 95%CI = 0.71-0.94). Per unit increase of adherence, the risk of depression was reduced by 5% (HR = 0.95, 95%CI = 0.92-0.98). The association became stronger when restricting to severe form of depression (HR = 0.51, 95%CI = 0.33-0.76). The HRs were higher from age 50 onward both over the first and the second 10-year follow-up period, compared with before age 50, indicating stronger association with increasing age. Results remained after extensive sensitivity analyses. CONCLUSION: Higher adherence to a Mediterranean diet at middle age was associated with a lower risk of depression later in life among Swedish women.
34837801|a|Many neurodevelopmental conditions imply absent or severely reduced language capacities at school age. Evidence from functional magnetic resonance imaging is highly limited. We selected a series of five cases scanned with the same fMRI paradigm and the aim of relating individual language profiles onto underlying patterns of functional connectivity (FC) across auditory language cortex: three with neurogenetic syndromes (Coffin-Siris, Landau-Kleffner, and Fragile-X), one with idiopathic intellectual disability, one with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Compared to both a group with typical development (TD) and a verbal ASD group (total N = 110), they all showed interhemispheric FC below two standard deviations of the TD mean. Children with higher language scores showed higher intrahemispheric FC between Heschl's gyrus and other auditory language regions, as well as an increase of FC during language stimulation compared to rest. An increase of FC in forward vs. reversed speech in the posterior and middle temporal gyri was seen across all cases. The Coffin-Siris case, the most severe, also had the most anomalous FC patterns and showed reduced myelin content, while the Landau-Kleffner case showed reduced cortical thickness. These results suggest potential for neural markers and mechanisms of severe language processing deficits under highly heterogeneous etiological conditions.
34837755|a|BACKGROUND: Increasing numbers of autistic children are being educated in mainstream schools. The success of inclusive education is dependent upon multiple factors, including key stakeholders (i.e., teachers and parents). Research has tended to focus on teachers' experiences of inclusion with limited focus on parents. AIMS: The study aimed to qualitatively investigate parental attitudes and experiences of inclusive education. As such, the research question was: What are attitudes towards, and experiences of, inclusive education for parents of autistic children? METHODS AND PROCEDURE: Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 12 parents of autistic children. Data was analysed using Thematic Analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2006). OUTCOMES AND RESULTS: four themes were identified; 1) Feeling Unheard; 2) Implementation of Inclusive Strategies; 3) Social Exclusion; 4) Mental Health and Wellbeing Impact. Findings suggested that parents felt their child struggled socially in mainstream school, with such experiences negatively impacting upon their child's wellbeing. The detrimental impacts were a result of parents believing school staff dismissed their concerns and thus appropriate strategies for their child were not always implemented. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: This highlights the need for school staff and parents to work together to enhance inclusivity both academically and socially for autistic children.
34837355|a|The present study objectives were to examine the performance of the new M-CHAT-R algorithm to the original M-CHAT algorithm. The main purpose was to examine if the algorithmic changes increase identification of children later diagnosed with ASD, and to examine if there is a trade-off when changing algorithms. We included 54,463 screened cases from the Norwegian Mother and Child Cohort Study. Children were screened using the 23 items of the M-CHAT at 18 months. Further, the performance of the M-CHAT-R algorithm was compared to the M-CHAT algorithm on the 23-items. In total, 337 individuals were later diagnosed with ASD. Using M-CHAT-R algorithm decreased the number of correctly identified ASD children by 12 compared to M-CHAT, with no children with ASD screening negative on the M-CHAT criteria subsequently screening positive utilizing the M-CHAT-R algorithm. A nonparametric McNemar's test determined a statistically significant difference in identifying ASD utilizing the M-CHAT-R algorithm. The present study examined the application of 20-item MCHAT-R scoring criterion to the 23-item MCHAT. We found that this resulted in decreased sensitivity and increased specificity for identifying children with ASD, which is a trade-off that needs further investigation in terms of cost-effectiveness. However, further research is needed to optimize screening for ASD in the early developmental period to increase identification of false negatives.
34837352|a|The majority of existing studies investigating characteristics of overt social behavior in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) relied on informants' evaluation through questionnaires and behavioral coding techniques. As a novelty, this study aimed to quantify the complex movements produced during social interactions in order to test differences in ASD movement dynamics and their convergence, or lack thereof, during social interactions. Twenty children with ASD and twenty-three children with typical development (TD) were videotaped while engaged in a face-to-face conversation with an interviewer. An image differencing technique was utilized to extract the movement time series. Spectral analyses were conducted to quantify the average power of movement, and the fractal scaling of movement. The degree of complexity matching was calculated to capture the level of behavioral coordination between the interviewer and children. Results demonstrated that the average power was significantly higher (p < 0.01), and the fractal scaling was steeper (p < 0.05) in children with ASD, suggesting excessive and less complex movement as compared to the TD peers. Complexity matching occurred between children and interviewers, but there was no reliable difference in the strength of matching between the ASD and TD children. Descriptive trends in the interviewer's behavior suggest that her movements adapted to match both ASD and TD movements equally well. The findings of our study might shed light on seeking novel behavioral markers of ASD, and on developing automatic ASD screening techniques during daily social interactions.
34837153|a|Early Intensive Behavioural Intervention (EIBI) is effective for preschoolers with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Parental measures are rarely included in EIBI effectiveness studies, yet parental distress and lower self-efficacy are associated with poorer child outcomes. Parents of preschoolers with ASD (N = 485) were surveyed at baseline (T1), one-year post-intervention (T2), and school entry (T3) about family distress/crisis, parental self-efficacy, and satisfaction with services in two Canadian provinces. Family distress/crisis decreased and parental self-efficacy increased from T1 to T2. Increases in self-efficacy were largely maintained at T3. Parents were highly satisfied with services. Greater satisfaction for those residing in the province utilizing a parent-coaching model suggests that parent involvement is associated with positive parent outcomes.
34836713|a|PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to investigate associations between parent vaccine confidence and intention to have their child with autism vaccinated against COVID-19. DESIGN AND METHODS: A cross-sectional, web-based survey was conducted from May to July 2021 with parents of children with autism spectrum disorder (N = 322) who were members of an integrated healthcare system in Southern California. RESULTS: Approximately 35% of parents intended to vaccinate their child against COVID-19. In adjusted models, positive vaccine beliefs-but not belief in vaccine harm, healthcare provider trust, or parent vaccination status-were associated with intention to vaccinate. CONCLUSIONS: Though parents usually trust recommendations from pediatric healthcare providers to make decisions about their child's health, these findings suggest that relying on trusted relationships alone may not be sufficient when discussing COVID-19 vaccines and that additional education to bolster vaccine confidence may be needed. PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS: Pediatric healthcare providers should reinforce the benefits of vaccines for parents who are undecided about COVID-19 vaccines for their children and provide education and evidence-based recommendations to parents who hold erroneous vaccine beliefs about risks, benefits, and current evidence, especially those related to autism.
34836294|a|Atypical eating habits are more common in children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) than typically developing (TD) peers. Feeding problems may lead to the double burden of specific nutrient deficiencies and excessive weight gain, with a consequent increase in obesity prevalence. The dietary intake of Italian preschoolers with ASD compared to their TD peers and the impact of their dietary choices on their weight status and relationship to food selectivity (FS) were investigated. Dietary patterns and their associations with body mass index (BMI) were evaluated in 65 children with ASD and 82 peers with TD aged 1.3-6.4 years. Eating habits were assessed with a modified version of a parent-rated semi-quantitative Food Frequency Questionnaire. Moreover, the prevalence of FS and possible links with dietary patterns and BMI were investigated in the ASD group. Children with ASD consumed significantly higher amounts of simple sugars, processed and ultra-processed carbohydrates, both low- and high-fat animal proteins, and lower amounts of vegetables and fruits compared to peers with TD. The obesity rate was 1.5% in children with TD and more than fourfold (6.2%) in children with ASD, although the difference between groups was not statistically significant. FS was significantly more frequent in children with ASD than in peers with TD. Children with ASD and FS showed significantly lower annual intakes of vegetable proteins and fiber (considered essential nutrients for a healthy diet) than children with ASD without FS. Our results showed that children with ASD showed different dietary habits than those with TD, with the higher consumption of energy-dense foods and lower amounts of food-sourced fibers, which could place them at increased risk to develop overweight, obesity, and micronutrient deficiencies later in life.
34836104|a|Autism spectrum disorder is characterized by social communication deficit and non-normative behavior. The people with autism often experience troubles with feeding. The purpose of this study was to conduct evaluation of the feeding and eating behaviors among children with autism. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study group included 41 high-functioning autistic children. The control group consisted of 34 children without the ASD. The questionnaire was used to assess the nutritional status. RESULTS: The children with ASD fuss during mealtimes more frequently, they require entertaining and diverting their attention, they are fed by parents, and they consume their meals away from the table. The significant difference found in the use of utensils and food selectivity works to the disadvantage of the Study Group. CONCLUSIONS: The food selectivity occurs significantly more frequently among children with ASD. The feeding and eating problems should be considered on a wider scale. The cooperation of the multidisciplinary and the parents teams should be proposed in the ASD patients care.
34836074|a|Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) report a higher frequency and severity of gastrointestinal disorders (GID) than typically developing (TD) children. GID-associated discomfort increases feelings of anxiety and frustration, contributing to the severity of ASD. Emerging evidence supports the biological intersection of neurodevelopment and microbiome, indicating the integral contribution of GM in the development and function of the nervous system, and mental health, and disease balance. Dysbiotic GM could be a contributing factor in the pathogenesis of GID in children with ASD. High-fat diets may modulate GM through accelerated growth of bile-tolerant bacteria, altered bacterial ratios, and reduced bacterial diversity, which may increase the risk of GID. Notably, saturated fatty acids are considered to have a pronounced effect on the increase of bile-tolerant bacteria and reduction in microbial diversity. Additionally, omega-3 exerts a favorable impact on GM and gut health due to its anti-inflammatory properties. Despite inconsistencies in the data elaborated in the review, the dietary fat composition, as part of an overall dietary intervention, plays a role in modulating GID, specifically in ASD, due to the altered microbiome profile. This review emphasizes the need to conduct future experimental studies investigating the effect of diets with varying fatty acid compositions on GID-specific microbiome profiles in children with ASD.
34836053|a|INTRODUCTION: Accurate assessment of resting energy expenditure (REE) can guide optimal nutritional prescription in critically ill children. Indirect calorimetry (IC) is the gold standard for REE measurement, but its use is limited. Alternatively, REE estimates by predictive equations/formulae are often inaccurate. Recently, predicting REE with artificial neural networks (ANN) was found to be accurate in healthy children. We aimed to investigate the role of ANN in predicting REE in critically ill children and to compare the accuracy with common equations/formulae. STUDY METHODS: We enrolled 257 critically ill children. Nutritional status/vital signs/biochemical values were recorded. We used IC to measure REE. Commonly employed equations/formulae and the VCO2-based Mehta equation were estimated. ANN analysis to predict REE was conducted, employing the TWIST system. RESULTS: ANN considered demographic/anthropometric data to model REE. The predictive model was good (accuracy 75.6%; R2 = 0.71) but not better than Talbot tables for weight. After adding vital signs/biochemical values, the model became superior to all equations/formulae (accuracy 82.3%, R2 = 0.80) and comparable to the Mehta equation. Including IC-measured VCO2 increased the accuracy to 89.6%, superior to the Mehta equation. CONCLUSIONS: We described the accuracy of REE prediction using models that include demographic/anthropometric/clinical/metabolic variables. ANN may represent a reliable option for REE estimation, overcoming the inaccuracies of traditional predictive equations/formulae.
34835929|a|PURPOSE OF REVIEW: increasing evidence suggests that besides the several metabolic, endocrine, and immune functions of 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH)2D), the neuronal effects of 1,25(OH)2D should also be considered an essential contributor to the development of cognition in the early years and its maintenance in aging. The developmental disabilities induced by vitamin D deficiency (VDD) include neurological disorders (e.g., attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia) characterized by cognitive dysfunction. On the other hand, VDD has frequently been associated with dementia of aging and neurodegenerative diseases (e.g., Alzheimer's, Parkinson's disease). RECENT FINDINGS: various cells (i.e., neurons, astrocytes, and microglia) within the central nervous system (CNS) express vitamin D receptors (VDR). Moreover, some of them are capable of synthesizing and catabolizing 1,25(OH)2D via 25-hydroxyvitamin D 1alpha-hydroxylase (CYP27B1) and 25-hydroxyvitamin D 24-hydroxylase (CYP24A1) enzymes, respectively. Both 1,25(OH)2D and 25-hydroxyvitamin D were determined from different areas of the brain and their uneven distribution suggests that vitamin D signaling might have a paracrine or autocrine nature in the CNS. Although both cholecalciferol and 25-hydroxyvitamin D pass the blood-brain barrier, the influence of supplementation has not yet demonstrated to have a direct impact on neuronal functions. So, this review summarizes the existing evidence for the action of vitamin D on cognitive function in animal models and humans and discusses the possible pitfalls of therapeutic clinical translation.
34834493|a|The cerebral folate receptor alpha (FRalpha) transports 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5-MTHF) into the brain; low 5-MTHF in the brain causes cerebral folate deficiency (CFD). CFD has been associated with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and is treated with d,l-leucovorin (folinic acid). One cause of CFD is an autoantibody that interferes with the function of the FRalpha. FRalpha autoantibodies (FRAAs) have been reported in ASD. A systematic review was performed to identify studies reporting FRAAs in association with ASD, or the use of d,l-leucovorin in the treatment of ASD. A meta-analysis examined the prevalence of FRAAs in ASD. The pooled prevalence of ASD in individuals with CFD was 44%, while the pooled prevalence of CFD in ASD was 38% (with a significant variation across studies due to heterogeneity). The etiology of CFD in ASD was attributed to FRAAs in 83% of the cases (with consistency across studies) and mitochondrial dysfunction in 43%. A significant inverse correlation was found between higher FRAA serum titers and lower 5-MTHF CSF concentrations in two studies. The prevalence of FRAA in ASD was 71% without significant variation across studies. Children with ASD were 19.03-fold more likely to be positive for a FRAA compared to typically developing children without an ASD sibling. For individuals with ASD and CFD, meta-analysis also found improvements with d,l-leucovorin in overall ASD symptoms (67%), irritability (58%), ataxia (88%), pyramidal signs (76%), movement disorders (47%), and epilepsy (75%). Twenty-one studies (including four placebo-controlled and three prospective, controlled) treated individuals with ASD using d,l-leucovorin. d,l-Leucovorin was found to significantly improve communication with medium-to-large effect sizes and have a positive effect on core ASD symptoms and associated behaviors (attention and stereotypy) in individual studies with large effect sizes. Significant adverse effects across studies were generally mild but the most common were aggression (9.5%), excitement or agitation (11.7%), headache (4.9%), insomnia (8.5%), and increased tantrums (6.2%). Taken together, d,l-leucovorin is associated with improvements in core and associated symptoms of ASD and appears safe and generally well-tolerated, with the strongest evidence coming from the blinded, placebo-controlled studies. Further studies would be helpful to confirm and expand on these findings.
34834471|a|In the last decade, Autism has broadened and often shifted its diagnostics criteria, allowing several neuropsychiatric and neurological disorders of known etiology. This has resulted in a highly heterogeneous spectrum with apparent exponential rates in prevalence. I ask if it is possible to leverage existing genetic information about those disorders making up Autism today and use it to stratify this spectrum. To that end, I combine genes linked to Autism in the SFARI database and genomic information from the DisGeNET portal on 25 diseases, inclusive of non-neurological ones. I use the GTEx data on genes' expression on 54 human tissues and ask if there are overlapping genes across those associated to these diseases and those from SFARI-Autism. I find a compact set of genes across all brain-disorders which express highly in tissues fundamental for somatic-sensory-motor function, self-regulation, memory, and cognition. Then, I offer a new stratification that provides a distance-based orderly clustering into possible Autism subtypes, amenable to design personalized targeted therapies within the framework of Precision Medicine. I conclude that viewing Autism through this physiological (Precision) lens, rather than viewing it exclusively from a psychological behavioral construct, may make it a more manageable condition and dispel the Autism epidemic myth.
34834431|a|OBJECTIVE: Anorexia nervosa (AN) is characterized by weight loss, distorted body image with fear of becoming fat and associated with anxiety, especially in relation to food intake. Anxiety in relation to meals and weight restoration remains a major challenge in the treatment of AN. We examined the effects of inpatient weight restoration treatment on levels of post-meal anxiety using visual analogue scale (VAS) ratings in patients with AN. MATERIALS: Thirty-two patients with AN, all part of the PROspective Longitudinal all-comer inclusion study on Eating Disorders (PROLED) were followed over eight weeks with baseline psychometric measures and weekly VAS anxiety self-scoring. METHODS: Apart from the weekly body mass index (BMI) and VAS, patients were characterized at baseline using the Eating Disorder Examination Questionnaire (EDE-Q), Eating Disorder Inventory (EDI), Symptom Check List 92 (SCL-92), Major Depression Inventory (MDI), and Autism Quotient (AQ). RESULTS: The results showed a significant time effect, Wilks Lambda = 0.523, F = 3.12, p < 0.05 (power of 0.862), indicating a reduction in VAS scores of anxiety from baseline to week 8. There was no effect of baseline medication or scores of MDI on the results. BMI increased from a mean of 15.16 (week 1) to 17.35 (week 8). In comparison, patients dropping out after only three weeks (n = 31) also had a trend toward a reduction in VAS anxiety (ns). CONCLUSIONS: Inpatient weight restoration treatment is associated with a decrease in post-meal anxiety in AN, an effect that occurs early and becomes clinically significant in patients who stay in treatment.
34833122|a|Alignment-free approaches employing short k-mers as barcodes for individual genomes have created a new strategy for taxonomic analysis and paved a way for high-resolution phylogeny. Here, we introduce this strategy for the Lacticaseibacillus paracasei species as a taxon requiring barcoding support for precise systematics. Using this approach for phylotyping of L. paracasei VKM B-1144 at the genus level, we identified four L. paracasei phylogroups and found that L. casei 12A belongs to one of them, rather than to the L. casei clade. Therefore, we propose to change the specification of this strain. At the genus level we found only one relative of L. paracasei VKM B-1144 among 221 genomes, complete or available in contigs, and showed that the coding potential of the genome of this "rare" strain allows its consideration as a potential probiotic component. Four sets of published metagenomes were used to assess the dependence of L. paracasei presence in the human gut microbiome on chronic diseases, dietary changes and antibiotic treatment. Only antibiotics significantly affected their presence, and strain-specific barcoding allowed the identification of the main scenarios of the adaptive response. Thus, suggesting bacteria of this species for compensatory therapy, we also propose strain-specific barcoding for selecting optimal strains for target microbiomes.
34832880|a|In the last two decades, abnormal Ras (rat sarcoma protein)-ERK (extracellular signal-regulated kinase) signalling in the brain has been involved in a variety of neuropsychiatric disorders, including drug addiction, certain forms of intellectual disability, and autism spectrum disorder. Modulation of membrane-receptor-mediated Ras activation has been proposed as a potential target mechanism to attenuate ERK signalling in the brain. Previously, we showed that a cell penetrating peptide, RB3, was able to inhibit downstream signalling by preventing RasGRF1 (Ras guanine nucleotide-releasing factor 1), a neuronal specific GDP/GTP exchange factor, to bind Ras proteins, both in brain slices and in vivo, with an IC50 value in the micromolar range. The aim of this work was to mutate and improve this peptide through computer-aided techniques to increase its inhibitory activity against RasGRF1. The designed peptides were built based on the RB3 peptide structure corresponding to the alpha-helix of RasGRF1 responsible for Ras binding. For this purpose, the hydrogen-bond surrogate (HBS) approach was exploited to maintain the helical conformation of the designed peptides. Finally, residue scanning, MD simulations, and MM-GBSA calculations were used to identify 18 most promising alpha-helix-shaped peptides that will be assayed to check their potential activity against Ras-RasGRF1 and prevent downstream molecular events implicated in brain disorders.
34831929|a|There is insufficient knowledge about the psychometric properties of the Friedrich short form of the Questionnaire on Resources and Stress (QRS-F) used to measure the caregiving burden of caregivers of individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The present study, therefore, aimed to confirm the validity of the QRS-F. The data selected using the systematic sampling method were analyzed to verify the factor structure of the QRS-F on parents of individuals with ASD. Exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses were employed to confirm the validity and the factor structure of the scale. The Pearson correlation coefficient was calculated to verify the relation with other measures. The original factor model was not appropriate to assess the caregiving burden on parents of individuals with ASD because the models did not show adequate fit indices. The evaluation of results based on a total score was explored, which demonstrated the expected association between depression severity and caregiving time. Overall, this study supports the use of the QRS-F for measuring the caregiving burden of parents of individuals with ASD by comparing the total score with other related variables.
34831840|a|Objective: To systematically review interventions aimed at improving employment participation of people with psychosocial disability, autism, and intellectual disability. Methods: We searched MEDLINE, Embase, PsycINFO, Web of Science, Scopus, CINAHL, ERIC, and ERC for studies published from 2010 to July 2020. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of interventions aimed at increasing participation in open/competitive or non-competitive employment were eligible for inclusion. We included studies with adults with psychosocial disability autism and/or intellectual disability. Risk of bias was assessed using the Cochrane Collaboration Risk of Bias II Tool. Data were qualitatively synthesized. Our review was registered with PROSPERO (CRD42020219192). Results: We included 26 RCTs: 23 targeted people with psychosocial disabilities (n = 2465), 3 included people with autism (n = 214), and none included people with intellectual disability. Risk of bias was high in 8 studies, moderate for 18, and low for none. There was evidence for a beneficial effect of Individual Placement and Support compared to control conditions in 10/11 studies. Among young adults with autism, there was some evidence for the benefit of Project SEARCH and ASD supports on open employment. Discussion: Gaps in the availability of high-quality evidence remain, undermining comparability and investment decisions in vocational interventions. Future studies should focus on improving quality and consistent measurement, especially for interventions targeting people with autism and/or intellectual disability.
34831577|a|Using data from the 2019 CIRP Freshman Survey and the Your First College Year (YFCY) from the Higher Education Research Institute at UCLA, this study explores the differences between the characteristics and behaviors of the first-year students with autism spectrum disorders (17) and those of students with learning disabilities (102). The findings indicate that the characteristics of these two groups of first-year college students were similar except for gender, ethnicity, first college generation, and parents' income. Compared with first-year college students with LD, students with ASD were less likely to engage in risk-taking behaviors, use health services and the writing center.
34831567|a|Prior to COVID-19, research into teletherapy models for individuals on the autism spectrum was slowly progressing. Following the onset of COVID-19, teletherapy became a necessity for continuity of services, however, research was still emerging for how to translate best practice autism support to the online environment. The aim of this research was to gain insight into the rapid shift to teletherapy for practitioner and service users and the implications for the broader disability sector. Survey responses were collected from 141 allied health practitioners (speech pathologists, occupational therapists, psychologists, educators, and social workers) from four Australian states and territories. A total of 806 responses were collected from service users following an individual teletherapy session. Five themes were identified during the qualitative analysis; (1) technology-love it or hate it; (2) teletherapy as a "new normal"; (3) short term pain, for long term gain; (4) the shape of service delivery has changed; (5) is teletherapy always an option? Data from the quantitative analysis provided further insights into the first two themes. While COVID-19 has brought forward significant advances in telehealth models of practice, what is needed now is to delve further into what works, for who, and in which context, and explore the potentiality, efficiencies, and scalability of a post-pandemic hybrid approach. This will inform practice guidelines and training, as well as information for service users on what to expect.
34831190|a|G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) play an integral role in the neurobiology of psychiatric disorders. Almost all neurotransmitters involved in psychiatric disorders act through GPCRs, and GPCRs are the most common targets of therapeutic drugs currently used in the treatment of psychiatric disorders. However, the roles of GPCRs in the etiology and pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders are not fully understood. Using publically available datasets, we performed a comprehensive analysis of the transcriptomic signatures of G-protein-linked signaling across the major psychiatric disorders: autism spectrum disorder (ASD), schizophrenia (SCZ), bipolar disorder (BP), and major depressive disorder (MDD). We also used the BrainSpan transcriptomic dataset of the developing human brain to examine whether GPCRs that exhibit chronological age-associated expressions have a higher tendency to be dysregulated in psychiatric disorders than age-independent GPCRs. We found that most GPCR genes were differentially expressed in the four disorders and that the GPCR superfamily as a gene cluster was overrepresented in the four disorders. We also identified a greater amplitude of gene expression changes in GPCRs than other gene families in the four psychiatric disorders. Further, dysregulated GPCRs overlapped across the four psychiatric disorders, with SCZ exhibiting the highest overlap with the three other disorders. Finally, the results revealed a greater tendency of age-associated GPCRs to be dysregulated in ASD than random GPCRs. Our results substantiate the central role of GPCR signaling pathways in the etiology and pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders. Furthermore, our study suggests that common GPCRs' signaling may mediate distinct phenotypic presentations across psychiatric disorders. Consequently, targeting these GPCRs could serve as a common therapeutic strategy to treat specific clinical symptoms across psychiatric disorders.
34830376|a|Fungicides often cause genotoxic stress and neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism (ASD). Fungicide-azoxystrobin (AZOX) showed acute and chronic toxicity to various organisms, and remained a concern for ill effects in developing neurons. We evaluated the neurotoxicity of AZOX in developing mouse brains, and observed prenatal exposure to AZOX reduced neuronal viability, neurite outgrowth, and cortical migration process in developing brains. The 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) of AZOX for acute (24 h) and chronic (7 days) exposures were 30 and 10 muM, respectively. Loss in viability was due to the accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and inhibited neurite outgrowth was due to the deactivation of mTORC1 kinase activity. Pretreatment with ROS scavenger- N-acetylcysteine (NAC) reserved the viability loss and forced activation of mTORC1 kinase revived the neurite outgrowth in AZOX treated neurons. Intra-amniotic injection of AZOX coupled with in utero electroporation of GFP-labelled plasmid in E15.5 mouse was performed and 20 mg/kg AZOX inhibited radial neuronal migration. Moreover, the accumulation of mitochondria was significantly reduced in AZOX treated primary neurons, indicative of mitochondrial deactivation and induction of apoptosis, which was quantified by Bcl2/Bax ratio and caspase 3 cleavage assay. This study elucidated the neurotoxicity of AZOX and explained the possible cure from it.
34830337|a|The hippocampus is a primary area for contextual memory, known to process spatiotemporal information within a specific episode. Long-term strengthening of glutamatergic transmission is a mechanism of contextual learning in the dorsal cornu ammonis 1 (CA1) area of the hippocampus. CA1-specific immobilization or blockade of alpha-amino-3-hydroxyl-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionate (AMPA) receptor delivery can impair learning performance, indicating a causal relationship between learning and receptor delivery into the synapse. Moreover, contextual learning also strengthens GABAA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) receptor-mediated inhibitory synapses onto CA1 neurons. Recently we revealed that strengthening of GABAA receptor-mediated inhibitory synapses preceded excitatory synaptic plasticity after contextual learning, resulting in a reduced synaptic excitatory/inhibitory (E/I) input balance that returned to pretraining levels within 10 min. The faster plasticity at inhibitory synapses may allow encoding a contextual memory and prevent cognitive dysfunction in various hippocampal pathologies. In this review, we focus on the dynamic changes of GABAA receptor mediated-synaptic currents after contextual learning and the intracellular mechanism underlying rapid inhibitory synaptic plasticity. In addition, we discuss that several pathologies, such as Alzheimer's disease, autism spectrum disorders and epilepsy are characterized by alterations in GABAA receptor trafficking, synaptic E/I imbalance and neuronal excitability.
34830216|a|Introduction: There is increasing evidence that steroid hormone levels and, especially, androgen levels are elevated in autism. An overactivity of 17, 20-lyase with a higher production of the testosterone precursors dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and androstenedione/androstenediol seems especially present in autism. Methods: An encompassing literature analysis was performed, searching for altered androgens in children with autism and using preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analysis (PRISMA) guidelines. Included were all studies published before 31 March 2021 found using the following electronic databases: PubMed, Google Scholar, Cochrane Library, Scopus, and TRIP. Eight studies with boys and three studies with girls where steroid hormone measurements were performed from either plasma, urine, or saliva were found and analyzed. Analyses were performed for DHEA(-S/-C), androstenedione/androstenediol, and testosterone. Effect sizes were calculated for each parameter between mean concentrations for children with autism versus healthy controls. Results: Higher levels of androgens in autism were detected, with the majority of calculated effect sizes being larger than one. Conclusions: We found higher levels of the main testosterone precursors DHEA, androstenedione, and androstenediol, likely causing an additionally higher level of testosterone, and an increased 17, 20-lyase activity is therefore implied. Medications already used in PCOS such as metformin might be considered to treat hyperandrogenism in autism following further research.
34829379|a|Radiomics with deep learning models have become popular in computer-aided diagnosis and have outperformed human experts on many clinical tasks. Specifically, radiomic models based on artificial intelligence (AI) are using medical data (i.e., images, molecular data, clinical variables, etc.) for predicting clinical tasks such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD). In this review, we summarized and discussed the radiomic techniques used for ASD analysis. Currently, the limited radiomic work of ASD is related to the variation of morphological features of brain thickness that is different from texture analysis. These techniques are based on imaging shape features that can be used with predictive models for predicting ASD. This review explores the progress of ASD-based radiomics with a brief description of ASD and the current non-invasive technique used to classify between ASD and healthy control (HC) subjects. With AI, new radiomic models using the deep learning techniques will be also described. To consider the texture analysis with deep CNNs, more investigations are suggested to be integrated with additional validation steps on various MRI sites.
34828752|a|Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a ubiquitous virus, and CMV-associated diseases range from mild illness in immunologically normal hosts to life-threatening diseases in newborns and immunocompromised children. This study investigated the association between childhood CMV infection and subsequent epilepsy or neurodevelopmental disorders, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). A retrospective analysis was performed on data for 69 children with confirmed CMV infections (CMV infection group) and 292 patients with other infections (control group) between 1 January 2006 to 31 December 2012. The results indicated that the CMV infection group had a higher risk of epilepsy in comparison to the control (odds ratio (OR), 16.4; 95% CI (confidence interval), 3.32-80.7; p = 0.001). Epilepsy risk increased in younger children (age 0-2) with CMV infection when compared to the control group (OR, 32.6; 95% CI, 3.84-276; p = 0.001). The ASD risk was also determined to be higher in the CMV infection group (OR, 17.9; 95% CI, 1.96-162; p = 0.01). The ADHD risk between the groups was not significant. This study suggests that CMV infection in infancy may increase the risk of subsequent epilepsy and ASD, especially in infants younger than 2 years, but is not associated with ADHD.
34828746|a|There is a variable standard of access to quality neurodevelopmental assessment and diagnosis. People may have negative experiences, encountering lengthy waiting times, and inconsistent practices. Practitioners need guidance on standards and practices for assessment and diagnosis matched to new ways of working. In this paper, we present a new pathway and recommendations for multidisciplinary neurodevelopmental assessment and diagnosis for children and young people (<19 years), developed by the Scottish Government funded National Autism Implementation Team (NAIT). Our research used the Medical Research Council guidance for the development of complex interventions and included several iterative stages. Stage 1: n = 44 stakeholders attended an event on developing new practices for diagnosis and assessment. Stage 2: a literature synthesis was completed by the research team of clinical guidelines and diagnosis and assessment tools. Stage 3: an event with n = 127 stakeholders included discussion and debate of the data from stages 1 and 2. Recommendations and a draft pathway were written. Stage 4: successive drafts of recommendations and the pathway documentation were circulated among an advisory group, including multidisciplinary clinical experts and people with lived experience, until the final pathway was agreed upon. The finalised pathway includes guidance on terminology, assessment, diagnosis, triage, time standards and engagement of people with lived experience. The new pathway has been adopted by the Scottish Government. The pathway and associated documentation are freely available online for use by others.
34828737|a|Food selectivity is common in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). It can be defined as the unwillingness to eat common or new foods, resulting in a lack of variety in the diet or limited food consumption for multiple reasons, such as inflexibility or sensory alterations. We conducted a peer scoping review to describe the interventions that are carried out from occupational therapy (OT) in children with ASD with food selectivity. Two authors independently searched the databases PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, and EMBASE, as well as the OT journals indexed in Journal Citation Reports. Articles exploring OT interventions in children (<=12 years) with ASD and food selectivity, published in Spanish or English, with experimental design, and with full text available were included. Of the 1445 articles identified, 8 articles met the inclusion criteria. Three main intervention categories were identified: sensory-behavioral, family focused, and other interventions. Most of the interventions from OT were aimed at treating sensory-behavioral aspects. Only three articles described interventions led exclusively by occupational therapists, and the rest were led by a multidisciplinary team. Finally, although these interventions are not exclusive to OT, occupational therapists can participate together with other professionals as an essential component in the treatment of food selectivity in children with ASD.
34828713|a|Autism-assistive apps offer therapists and caregivers new approaches for educating and assisting individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), mainly in social interaction. Even though these apps are deemed effective, they are not. These autism-assistive apps are not highly customizable, which limits their usefulness. This article examined the application software that was applied to encourage verbal communication in the intervention for children with ASD. The aim was to determine the minimum requirements for a verbal communication intervention app that adequately satisfies children with ASD, caregivers, and therapists. Databases were searched, including Scopus, Springer, PubMed, Education Resources Information Centre, and Google Scholar, with the following free-text terms combining Boolean operators: autism, children, intervention, verbal communication, software, app, and technology. A total of fifteen studies were found relevant, and the following information was collected: participant characteristics, information on the devices and apps, target behaviors, intervention procedures, and intervention outcomes. The findings suggest that the autism-assistive apps effectively improve verbal communication of children with ASD. For that, the apps should be attractive and engaging to the children with ASD, able to identify the child's capability and suggest appropriate lesson activities, as well as encompass specific learning outcomes with multilevel lesson strategy. The apps should also use systematic evidence-based intervention procedures in the activities, be able to evaluate the child's learning progress, and allow caregivers or therapists to keep track of application usage and performance. The use of apps in intervention does provide many benefits. However, they should never replace qualified therapists. App-based interventions make home-based treatment more focused, systematic, and economical.
34828519|a|BACKGROUND: Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) have been associated with psychological distress, comorbid psychiatric disorders, and worsening in quality of life (QoL). Among the neurodevelopmental disorders, autism spectrum disorders (ASD) have shown the highest rates of co-occurrence with EDS. The reasons for these associations are unknown and a possible role of pain in increasing the risk of psychiatric disorders in EDS has been suggested. However, a detailed picture of an Italian EDS sample is still lacking. METHODS: We conducted a web-based survey in a third level center for the diagnosis of EDS in northern Italy, to investigate psychological distress, QoL, and the presence of autistic traits. Furthermore, we correlated the psychometric data with some clinical variables. RESULTS: We observed a high rate of psychological distress with 91% of the responders at high risk of common mental disorders, low QoL, and high prevalence of autistic traits in EDS patients. Specifically, patients lacking a specific genetic test, diagnosed as suspects of EDS appeared to be at greater risk and reported worse psychological QoL. Pain was significantly associated with both psychological distress and worse QoL. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support the need of further research and of a multi-disciplinary approach to EDS including psychological and psychiatric liaison.
34828352|a|Mutations affecting mTOR or RAS signaling underlie defined syndromes (the so-called mTORopathies and RASopathies) with high risk for Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). These syndromes show a broad variety of somatic phenotypes including cancers, skin abnormalities, heart disease and facial dysmorphisms. Less well studied are the neuropsychiatric symptoms such as ASD. Here, we assess the relevance of these signalopathies in ASD reviewing genetic, human cell model, rodent studies and clinical trials. We conclude that signalopathies have an increased liability for ASD and that, in particular, ASD individuals with dysmorphic features and intellectual disability (ID) have a higher chance for disruptive mutations in RAS- and mTOR-related genes. Studies on rodent and human cell models confirm aberrant neuronal development as the underlying pathology. Human studies further suggest that multiple hits are necessary to induce the respective phenotypes. Recent clinical trials do only report improvements for comorbid conditions such as epilepsy or cancer but not for behavioral aspects. Animal models show that treatment during early development can rescue behavioral phenotypes. Taken together, we suggest investigating the differential roles of mTOR and RAS signaling in both human and rodent models, and to test drug treatment both during and after neuronal development in the available model systems.
34828306|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a genetically heterogenous neurodevelopmental disorder. In the early years of next-generation sequencing, de novo germline variants were shown to contribute to ASD risk. These germline mutations are present in all of the cells of an affected individual and can be detected in any tissue, including clinically accessible DNA sources such as blood or saliva. In recent years, studies have also implicated de novo somatic variants in ASD risk. These somatic mutations arise postzygotically and are present in only a subset of the cells of an affected individual. Depending on the developmental time and progenitor cell in which a somatic mutation occurs, it may be detectable in some tissues and not in others. Somatic mutations detectable at relatively low sequencing coverage in clinically accessible tissues are suggested to contribute to 3-5% of simplex ASD diagnoses, and "brain limited" somatic mutations have been identified in postmortem ASD brain tissue. Somatic mutations likely represent the genetic diagnosis in a proportion of otherwise unexplained individuals with ASD, and brain limited somatic mutations can be used as markers to discover risk genes, cell types, brain regions, and cellular pathways important for ASD pathogenesis and to potentially target for therapeutics.
34828273|a|Novel genome editing and transient gene therapies have been developed the past ten years, resulting in the first in-human clinical trials for monogenic disorders. Syndromic autism spectrum disorders can be caused by mutations in a single gene. Given the monogenic aspect and severity of syndromic ASD, it is an ideal candidate for gene therapies. Here, we selected 11 monogenic ASD syndromes, validated by animal models, and reviewed current gene therapies for each syndrome. Given the wide variety and novelty of some forms of gene therapy, the best possible option must be decided based on the gene and mutation.
34828266|a|Syndromic neurodevelopmental disorders are usually investigated through genetics technologies, within which array comparative genomic hybridization (Array-CGH) is still considered the first-tier clinical diagnostic test. Among recurrent syndromic imbalances, 17q12 deletions and duplications are characterized by neurodevelopmental disorders associated with visceral developmental disorders, although expressive variability is common. Here we describe a case series of 12 patients with 17q12 chromosomal imbalances, in order to expand the phenotypic characterization of these recurrent syndromes whose diagnosis is often underestimated, especially if only mild traits are present. Gene content and genotype-phenotype correlations have been discussed, with special regard to neuropsychiatric features, whose impact often requires etiologic analysis.
34827633|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) are neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders affecting two opposite ends of life span, i.e., childhood and old age. Both disorders pose a cumulative threat to human health, with the rate of incidences increasing considerably worldwide. In the context of recent developments, we aimed to review correlated symptoms and genetics, and overlapping aspects in the mechanisms of the pathogenesis of ASD and AD. Dementia, insomnia, and weak neuromuscular interaction, as well as communicative and cognitive impairments, are shared symptoms. A number of genes and proteins linked with both disorders have been tabulated, including MECP2, ADNP, SCN2A, NLGN, SHANK, PTEN, RELN, and FMR1. Theories about the role of neuron development, processing, connectivity, and levels of neurotransmitters in both disorders have been discussed. Based on the recent literature, the roles of FMRP (Fragile X mental retardation protein), hnRNPC (heterogeneous ribonucleoprotein-C), IRP (Iron regulatory proteins), miRNAs (MicroRNAs), and alpha-, beta0, and gamma-secretases in the posttranscriptional regulation of cellular synthesis and processing of APP (amyloid-beta precursor protein) have been elaborated to describe the parallel and overlapping routes and mechanisms of ASD and AD pathogenesis. However, the interactive role of genetic and environmental factors, oxidative and metal ion stress, mutations in the associated genes, and alterations in the related cellular pathways in the development of ASD and AD needs further investigation.
34827545|a|Oxytocin (OT) circuitry plays a major role in the mediation of prosocial behavior. Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are characterized by impairments in social interaction and communication and have been suggested to display deficiencies in central OT mechanisms. The current preregistered meta-analysis evaluated potential group differences in endogenous OT levels between individuals with ASD and neurotypical (NT) controls. We included 18 studies comprising a total of 1422 participants. We found that endogenous OT levels are lower in children with ASD as compared to NT controls (n = 1123; g = -0.60; p = 0.006), but this effect seems to disappear in adolescent (n = 152; g = -0.20; p = 0.53) and adult populations (n = 147; g = 0.27; p = 0.45). Secondly, while no significant subgroup differences were found in regard to sex, the group difference in OT levels of individuals with versus without ASD seems to be only present in the studies with male participants (n = 814; g = -0.44; p = 0.08) and not female participants (n = 192; g = 0.11; p = 0.47). More research that employs more homogeneous methods is necessary to investigate potential developmental changes in endogenous OT levels, both in typical and atypical development, and to explore the possible use of OT level measurement as a diagnostic marker of ASD.
34827530|a|We aim to investigate whether EEG dynamics differ in adults with ASD (Autism Spectrum Disorders) and ADHD (attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder) compared with healthy subjects during the performance of an innovative cognitive task, Aristotle's valid and invalid syllogisms, and how these differences correlate with brain regions and behavioral data for each subject. We recorded EEGs from 14 scalp electrodes (channels) in 21 adults with ADHD, 21 with ASD, and 21 healthy, normal subjects. The subjects were exposed in a set of innovative cognitive tasks (inducing varying cognitive loads), Aristotle's two types of syllogism mentioned above. A set of 39 questions were given to participants related to valid-invalid syllogisms as well as a separate set of questionnaires, in order to collect a number of demographic and behavioral data, with the aim of detecting shared information with values of a feature extracted from EEG, the multiscale entropy (MSE), in the 14 channels ('brain regions'). MSE, a nonlinear information-theoretic measure of complexity, was computed to extract a feature that quantifies the complexity of the EEG. Behavior-Partial Least Squares Correlation, PLSC, is the method to detect the correlation between two sets of data, brain, and behavioral measures. -PLSC, a variant of PLSC, was applied to build a functional connectivity of the brain regions involved in the reasoning tasks. Graph-theoretic measures were used to quantify the complexity of the functional networks. Based on the results of the analysis described in this work, a mixed 14 x 2 x 3 ANOVA showed significant main effects of&nbsp;group factor and brain region* syllogism&nbsp;factor, as well as a significant brain region* group interaction. There are significant differences between the means of MSE (complexity) values at the 14 channels of the members of the 'pathological' groups of participants, i.e., between ASD and ADHD, while the difference in means of MSE between both ASD and ADHD and that of the control group is not significant. In conclusion, the valid-invalid type of syllogism generates significantly different complexity values, MSE, between ASD and ADHD. The complexity of activated brain regions of ASD participants increased significantly when switching from a valid to an invalid syllogism, indicating the need for more resources to 'face' the task escalating difficulty in ASD subjects. This increase is not so evident in both ADHD and control. Statistically significant differences were found also in the behavioral response of ASD and ADHD, compared with those of control subjects, based on the principal brain and behavior saliences extracted by PLSC. Specifically, two behavioral measures, the emotional state and the degree of confidence of participants in answering questions in Aristotle's valid-invalid syllogisms, and one demographic variable, age, statistically and significantly discriminate the three groups' ASD. The seed-PLC generated functional connectivity networks for ASD, ADHD, and control, were 'projected' on the regions of the Default Mode Network (DMN), the 'reference' connectivity, of which the structural changes were found significant in distinguishing the three groups. The contribution of this work lies in the examination of the relationship between brain activity and behavioral responses of healthy and 'pathological' participants in the case of cognitive reasoning of the type of Aristotle's valid and invalid syllogisms, using PLSC, a machine learning approach combined with MSE, a nonlinear method of extracting a feature based on EEGs that captures a broad spectrum of EEGs linear and nonlinear characteristics. The results seem promising in adopting this type of reasoning, in the future, after further enhancements and experimental tests, as a supplementary instrument towards examining the differences in brain activity and behavioral responses of ASD and ADHD patients. The application of the combination of these two methods, after further elaboration and testing as new and complementary to the existing ones, may be considered as a tool of analysis in helping detecting more effectively such types of disorders.
34827529|a|System-specific brain responses-time-locked to rapid eye movements (REMs) in sleep-are characteristically widespread, with robust and clear activation in the primary visual cortex and other structures involved in multisensory integration. This pattern suggests that REMs underwrite hierarchical processing of visual information in a time-locked manner, where REMs index the generation and scanning of virtual-world models, through multisensory integration in dreaming-as in awake states. Default mode network (DMN) activity increases during rest and reduces during various tasks including visual perception. The implicit anticorrelation between the DMN and task-positive network (TPN)-that persists in REM sleep-prompted us to focus on DMN responses to temporally-precise REM events. We timed REMs during sleep from the video recordings and quantified the neural correlates of REMs-using functional MRI (fMRI)-in 24 independent studies of 11 healthy participants. A reanalysis of these data revealed that the cortical areas exempt from widespread REM-locked brain activation were restricted to the DMN. Furthermore, our analysis revealed a modest temporally-precise REM-locked decrease-phasic deactivation-in key DMN nodes, in a subset of independent studies. These results are consistent with hierarchical predictive coding; namely, permissive deactivation of DMN at the top of the hierarchy (leading to the widespread cortical activation at lower levels; especially the primary visual cortex). Additional findings indicate REM-locked cerebral vasodilation and suggest putative mechanisms for dream forgetting.
34827466|a|To investigate the relationship between short-range and homotopic long-range resting state functional connectivity (RSFC) in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and typically developing (TD) children, we analyzed functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) RSFC in 25 children with ASD and 22 age-matched TD children. The resting state fNIRS signals, including spontaneous fluctuations in the oxygenated hemoglobin (HbO2) and deoxygenated hemoglobin (Hb) concentrations, were recorded from the bilateral temporal lobes. We found that (1) there was no difference in the short-range RSFC between the left and right hemisphere in either ASD or TD group; (2) both the short-range and homotopic long-range RSFC were weaker in the ASD than TD group; and (3) the short-range RSFC was stronger than the homotopic long-range RSFC in the ASD group, whereas no such difference was observed in the TD group. These observations might be helpful for a better understanding of the underlying cortical mechanism in ASD.
34827458|a|The feasibility of working on cognitive functions with children and adults with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) inside Multisensory Interactive Rooms (MIRs) has been poorly investigated, even if sensory atypicalities are common in ASD and usual intervention rooms could represent a challenging sensory setting for patients with ASD. We hypothesized that the possibility to calibrate the sensory stimulation offered by this type of environment, able to promote a positive emotional state in patients with ASD, can consequently favor the interaction with the therapist and the motivation towards activities targeting cognitive functions. High- and low-functioning children and low-functioning adolescents/adults underwent five sessions in a fully digitalized MIR, working on sustained attention, selective attention, association, single inhibition, receptive communication, verbalization, and turn. We developed specific protocols calibrated for sensory stimulation and difficulty level based on the characteristics of the participants. We found statistically significant improvements in all functions, except association, in the children's group. Therefore, a fully digitalized MIR seems suitable for intervention on cognitive functions in ASDs, but further investigations are needed to better address possible differences related to age and functioning level.
34827443|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental disability that can cause significant social, communication, and behavioral challenges. Early intervention for children with ASD can help to improve their intellectual ability and reduces autistic symptoms. Multiple clinical researches have suggested that facial phenotypic differences exist between ASD children and typically developing (TD) children. In this research, we propose a practical ASD screening solution using facial images through applying VGG16 transfer learning-based deep learning to a unique ASD dataset of clinically diagnosed children that we collected. Our model produced a 95% classification accuracy and 0.95 F1-score. The only other reported study using facial images to detect ASD was based on the Kaggle ASD Facial Image Dataset, which is an internet search-produced, low-quality, and low-fidelity dataset. Our results support the clinical findings of facial feature differences between children with ASD and TD children. The high F1-score achieved indicates that it is viable to use deep learning models to screen children with ASD. We concluded that the racial and ethnic-related factors in deep-learning based ASD screening with facial images are critical to solution viability and accuracy.
34827442|a|Altered patterns of brain connectivity have been found in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and associated with specific symptoms and behavioral features. Growing evidence suggests that the autistic peculiarities are not confined to the clinical population but extend along a continuum between healthy and maladaptive conditions. The aim of this study was to investigate whether a differentiated connectivity pattern could also be tracked along the continuum of autistic traits in a non-clinical population. A Granger causality analysis conducted on a resting-state EEG recording showed that connectivity along the posterior-frontal gradient is sensitive to the magnitude of individual autistic traits and mostly conveyed through fast oscillatory activity. Specifically, participants with higher autistic traits were characterized by a prevalence of ascending connections starting from posterior regions ramping the cortical hierarchy. These findings point to the presence of a tendency within the neural mapping of individuals with higher autistic features in conveying proportionally more bottom-up information. This pattern of findings mimics those found in clinical forms of autism, supporting the idea of a neurobiological continuum between autistic traits and ASD.
34827418|a|Parents of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) face unique challenges, which may affect parenting functioning. However, little is known about gender and cultural variations in parenting stress and styles in these families. The aims of this study were to investigate: (1a) the differences in parenting stress and (1b) social style between Italian and Japanese mothers and fathers of children with ASD; (2) the predictive role of culture, sociodemographic, and child's characteristics on parenting stress; (3) the predictors of the social parenting style, including parenting stress dimensions. The study involved 92 Italians and 89 Japanese parents of school-age children (5-12 years) with ASD who completed the Parenting Stress Index and the Parenting Style Questionnaire. Results revealed that Japanese parents showed higher parenting stress and less engagement in social style than Italians. Across cultures, mothers used more social style than fathers. Being Japanese and having a child with greater ASD severity predicted higher levels of parenting stress. We also found that country, parent's gender, and stress related to the dysfunctional interaction were significant predictors of parenting social style. Our findings highlight the importance of a cross-cultural approach to better understand the experiences and needs of mothers and fathers of children with ASD.
34827403|a|Due to its complexity and high variability in symptomology, autism spectrum disorder (ASD) requires a coordinated and multidisciplinary intervention to better support the different programs over time and to promote social interactions in all contexts of life. Telemedicine can offer a valuable contribution in this regard, providing low-cost and portable applications. In this paper, we presented an Italian project, SUPER, which aimed to foster collaboration and information sharing between ASD families, health services, and schools. SUPER provided a digital platform with several tools that were useful both to enhance general and specific ASD knowledge and to promote personalized programs for children with ASD. We conducted a preliminary user test for the platform with 30 participants (18 therapists and 12 parents of children with ASD) using the system usability scale (SUS). The total mean SUS score (89.2) showed that SUPER is an excellent, usable system. Moreover, we extracted the usability and learnability mean components from the SUS scores, which were 96.1 and 61.7, respectively. Our preliminary results indicate that SUPER is a very user-friendly application and its innovative telemedicine approach could be ahelpful communication and collaboration tool among the different contexts of care for children with ASD.
34827388|a|The COVID-19 pandemic had imposed a variety of containment measures on the general population for prolonged periods. Confinement has had, and still has, social, economic, educational, health, and psychological consequences on the entire population. OBJECTIVE: In this article, a systematic search has been performed based on studies carried out since the beginning of the pandemic, regarding the impact of these containment measures on the autism spectrum disorder (ASD) population and their caregivers. METHOD: We consulted six databases (i.e., PubMed, Medline, Embase, Scopus, Web of Science, and Science Direct) and selected ten studies that met the inclusion criteria. The chosen studies have been classified according to their theoretical focus, methodology, and target population. RESULTS: We found an increase in stress and a decrease in psychological well-being among individuals diagnosed with ASD (i.e., parents and caregivers). Additionally, in studies focused on children, youth, and adults with ASD diagnosis, the results are contradictory depending on variables such as age, ASD severity, or type of family structure. CONCLUSIONS: The results show that the consequences of quarantine and social confinement are quite contradictory and depend on variables such as age, ASD severity, and family features.
34827380|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a high-cost/high-burden problem. Early intervention may prevent development of the disorder, improving child outcomes and reducing long-term consequences. However, few studies have investigated the role of early intervention in children younger than two years. This study aims to examine the effect of early intervention in 18-month-old high-risk siblings of children with ASD (HR-ASD) with clinical signs of autism. The intervention is based on the principles of Applied Behavior Analysis and focuses on the development of early precursors to social and communicative competence (joint attention and imitation behaviors). After controlling for baseline differences, two comparison HR-ASD groups were included: 15 HR-ASD toddlers receiving behavioral intervention for 3 h per week for 5 months (INT+) and 15 HR-ASD toddlers who were only clinically monitored from age 18 months (INT-). Changes in social communication, restricted/repetitive behaviors, and language were assessed using standardized measures at pre- (T0) and post-intervention (T1). From T0 to T1, the INT+ group showed significant improvements in communication, social interaction, and language compared to INT- group. There was no effect on restricted/repetitive behaviors. Our findings highlighted the importance of early detection/intervention in autism and supported a positive impact of targeted interventions to improve outcomes in at-risk children.
34827371|a|Deficits in neuronal structure are consistently associated with neurodevelopmental illnesses such as autism and schizophrenia. Nonetheless, the inability to access neurons from clinical patients has limited the study of early neurostructural changes directly in patients' cells. This obstacle has been circumvented by differentiating stem cells into neurons, although the most used methodologies are time consuming. Therefore, we recently developed a relatively rapid (~20 days) protocol for transdifferentiating human circulating monocytes into neuronal-like cells. These monocyte-derived-neuronal-like cells (MDNCs) express several genes and proteins considered neuronal markers, such as MAP-2 and PSD-95. In addition, these cells conduct electrical activity. We have also previously shown that the structure of MDNCs is comparable with that of human developing neurons (HDNs) after 5 days in culture. Moreover, the neurostructure of MDNCs responds similarly to that of HDNs when exposed to colchicine and dopamine. In this manuscript, we expanded our characterization of MDNCs to include the expression of 12 neuronal genes, including tau. Following, we compared three different tracing approaches (two semi-automated and one automated) that enable tracing using photographs of live cells. This comparison is imperative for determining which neurite tracing method is more efficient in extracting neurostructural data from MDNCs and thus allowing researchers to take advantage of the faster yield provided by these neuronal-like cells. Surprisingly, it was one of the semi-automated methods that was the fastest, consisting of tracing only the longest primary and the longest secondary neurite. This tracing technique also detected more structural deficits. The only automated method tested, Volocity, detected MDNCs but failed to trace the entire neuritic length. Other advantages and disadvantages of the three tracing approaches are also presented and discussed.
34826797|a|The behavioral and cognitive deficits in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) patients are associated with abnormal brain function. The resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) is an effective non-invasive tool for revealing the brain dysfunction for ASD patients. However, most rs-fMRI based ASD diagnosis methods are developed for simple binary classification, instead of classification of multiple sub-types in ASD. Besides, they assume that the class boundary in ASD classification is crisp, whereas the symptoms of ASD sub-types are a continuum from mild to severe impairments in both social communication and restrictive repetitive behaviors/interests, and do not have crisp boundary between each other. To this end, we introduce label distribution learning (LDL) into multi-class ASD classification and propose LDL-CSCS under the LDL framework. Specifically, the label distribution is introduced to describe how individual disease labels correlate with the subject. In the learning crierion of LDL-CSCS, the label distribution is decomposed into the class-shared and class-specific components, in which the class-shared component records the common knowledge across all persons and the class-specific component records the specific information in each ASD sub-type. Low-rank constraint is imposed on the class-shared component whereas the group sparse constraint is imposed on the class-specific component, respectively. An Augmented Lagrange Method (ALM) is developed to find the optimal solution. The experimental results show that the proposed method for ASD diagnosis has superior classification performance, compared with some existing algorithms.
34826776|a|BACKGROUND: The lockdown due to the COVID-19 pandemic has been a difficult period for children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), and their families. AIMS: The aim of this study was to investigate the predictors of the quality of life (QoL) of children with ASD and their parents throughout the first lockdown, providing a snapshot of the impact of the pandemic on these families life. METHOD AND PROCEDURES: A cohort of 243 parents of children with ASD (2-15 years old) completed an original online survey regarding the modification of ASD cores symptoms during lockdown, the type of interventions they had done before and during lockdown and the activities performed by the child. Respondents filled the PedsQL for themselves and their children. OUTCOME AND RESULTS: The data obtained show a worsening of specific ASD core symptoms during lockdown and their role in predicting parents and children's QoL. Furthermore, protective factors for a better children's QoL as the Telehealth intervention, and some activities done at home during the lockdown as physical activity and play with parents are identified. CONCLUSIONS: This study identifies the QoL's risk and protective factors for children with ASD and their families. Furthermore, reveals the fundamental role of the parents as children's QoL protective factor, suggesting a higher collaboration between families and health care providers, whilst potentially improving families and children's QoL.
34826656|a|OBJECTIVE: Few studies have evaluated the association between children's exposure to environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) in early life (during pregnancy, from birth to one year and from one to three years) and autistic-like behaviors. This study aimed to explore this association. METHODS: This cross-sectional study analyzed data collected in 2017 as part of the Longhua Child Cohort Study. Autistic-like behaviors were measured using the Autism Behavior Checklist (ABC). Data on ETS exposure and autistic-like behaviors of children were collected via self-administered questionnaires completed by the mothers. Multivariate logistic regression models were undertaken to assess the associations. RESULTS: Of the 65,243 participants included in this study, 1958 children met criteria for having autistic-like behaviors. The results showed that children were more likely to exhibit autistic-like behaviors when they were exposed to ETS in early life (AOR = 1.38; 95% CI = 1.26-1.52), compared to preschoolers without ETS exposure at any period of their early life. Compared with their unexposed counterparts, children who were exposed to ETS during gestation (AOR = 1.42; 95% CI = 1.29-1.57), or from birth to one year old (AOR = 1.42; 95% CI = 1.19-1.69) had significantly increased risk of autistic-like behaviors. In addition, with the increase in duration of exposure and average number of cigarettes smoked in the child's immediate environment, the risk of autistic-like behaviors increased. CONCLUSION: Our study indicated that children's ETS exposure in early life was significantly associated with autistic-like behaviors. When children's exposure to cigarettes in early life increased in duration and number, the likelihood of the presence of autistic-like behaviors was higher.
34826393|a|BACKGROUND: Poor attendance at school, whether due to absenteeism or exclusion, leads to multiple social, educational, and lifelong socioeconomic disadvantages. We aimed to measure the association between a broad range of diagnosed neurodevelopmental and mental disorders and recorded self-harm by the age of 24 years and school attendance and exclusion. METHODS: In this nationwide, retrospective, electronic cohort study, we drew a cohort from the Welsh Demographic Service Dataset, which included individuals aged 7-16 years (16 years being the school leaving age in the UK) enrolled in state-funded schools in Wales in the academic years 2012/13-2015/16 (between Sept 1, 2012, and Aug 31, 2016). Using the Adolescent Mental Health Data Platform, we linked attendance and exclusion data to national demographic and primary and secondary health-care datasets. We identified all pupils with a recorded diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disorders (ADHD and autism spectrum disorder [ASD]), learning difficulties, conduct disorder, depression, anxiety, eating disorders, alcohol or drugs misuse, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, other psychotic disorders, or recorded self-harm (our explanatory variables) before the age of 24 years. Outcomes were school absence and exclusion. Generalised estimating equations with exchangeable correlation structures using binomial distribution with the logit link function were used to calculate odds ratios (OR) for absenteeism and exclusion, adjusting for sex, age, and deprivation. FINDINGS: School attendance, school exclusion, and health-care data were available for 414 637 pupils (201 789 [48 7%] girls and 212 848 [51 3%] boys; mean age 10 5 years [SD 3 8] on Sept 1, 2012; ethnicity data were not available). Individuals with a record of a neurodevelopmental disorder, mental disorder, or self-harm were more likely to be absent or excluded in any school year than were those without a record. Unadjusted ORs for absences ranged from 2 1 (95% CI 2 0-2 2) for those with neurodevelopmental disorders to 6 6 (4 9-8 3) for those with bipolar disorder. Adjusted ORs (aORs) for absences ranged from 2 0 (1 9-2 1) for those with neurodevelopmental disorders to 5 5 (4 2-7 2) for those with bipolar disorder. Unadjusted ORs for exclusion ranged from 1 7 (1 3-2 2) for those with eating disorders to 22 7 (20 8-24 7) for those with a record of drugs misuse. aORs for exclusion ranged from 1 8 (1 5-2 0) for those with learning difficulties to 11 0 (10 0-12 1) for those with a record of drugs misuse. INTERPRETATION: Children and young people up to the age of 24 years with a record of a neurodevelopmental or mental disorder or self-harm before the age of 24 years were more likely to miss school than those without a record. Exclusion or persistent absence are potential indicators of current or future poor mental health that are routinely collected and could be used to target assessment and early intervention. Integrated school-based and health-care strategies to support young peoples' engagement with school life are required. FUNDING: The Medical Research Council, MQ Mental Health Research, and the Economic and Social Research Council. TRANSLATION: For the Welsh translation of the abstract see Supplementary Materials section.
34826349|a|Delays in motor development are not considered a core feature of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Yet, recent studies of infant siblings of children with ASD suggest that early delays in motor skills may be associated with later delays in developmental areas considered to be core features of an ASD diagnosis. While these studies demonstrate the longitudinal association between core features and motor delays observed at single time points, there is considerable interest in studying the trajectories of motor development over the first 3 years of life. To accomplish this, we investigated early trajectories of motor development in a cohort of 499 infant siblings of children with ASD and 176 children with no family history of ASD. Data for the current study were drawn from the prospective, multi-site, Canadian Infant Sibling Study. We evaluated trajectories of fine and gross motor development over the first 3 years using group-based trajectory modeling. Our results show that membership for both fine and gross motor trajectory groups was related to expressive language skills, receptive language skills, ASD symptom severity scores, and diagnostic classification at age 3. These results provide evidence that the trajectory of a child's early motor development may have important prognostic implications in ASD.
34826197|a|This study was performed to determine (a) the age at which autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is first diagnosed in Ugandan children receiving mental health services, (b) whether age at diagnosis varies by sex and clinical presentation, and (c) the average age of ASD diagnosis in children manifesting comorbid conditions. A retrospective chart review was performed and demographic as well as clinical data were collected from children with ASD diagnoses who attended two mental health clinics in Uganda between 2014 and 2019. Descriptive statistics such as percentages, means, and standard deviations were used to summarize the data. Independent t-test was also performed to determine differences in the mean age of diagnosis between males and females. Two hundred and thirty-seven (156 males, 81 females) children with ASD were identified. The average age of ASD diagnosis was (6.9 +- 4.0) years. A statistically significant difference in age of ASD diagnosis was found between males and females (t = -2.106, p = 0.036), such that on average females received a diagnosis at least 1 year later than males. Of the 237 participants, 53.6% were identified with ASD only, 16.0% had ASD and ADHD, 10.5% were diagnosed with ASD and epilepsy, and 7.2% had a diagnosis of complex ASD. The results confirm delays in access to ASD diagnosis and suggest that females are more likely to receive a ASD diagnosis later than males within the Ugandan context. ASD awareness should be intensified to improve public or professional knowledge about ASD to enhance early identification in Uganda.
34826145|a|Behavioral skills training (BST) is a well-established procedure used to train individuals how to perform a variety of complex skills. Previous research has used BST to train parents, teachers, and clinicians how to conduct a variety of clinical procedures, including functional analysis of problem behavior. Although this procedure has been demonstrated to be very effective, it can be time consuming and resource intensive. In the present study, 13 behavior analysts were trained to conduct functional analyses of problem behavior. All participants were employees of a multistate early intervention clinic. This staff training was conducted fully remotely, and trainers acted as child role-play partners. Participants experienced baseline, an instruction/discussion component, a post-instruction probe, group BST, and a post-BST probe. For 5 participants, in-situ probes were also conducted. All participants achieved mastery and in-situ errors were low.
34825585|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Autism spectrum conditions were once seen as a predominantly male condition, but this has caused research to have little focus on women. Therefore, little is known about menstruation and menopause in autism spectrum conditions. Some smaller studies indicate that autistic individuals might suffer from increased difficulties surrounding these events. This study aimed to investigate whether autistic women experience more frequent premenstrual dysphoric disorder, causing extreme physical, emotional, and functional impairment. In a partly overlapping sample, we also examined whether women with autism spectrum condition experience increased complaints surrounding menopause. We did not find an increased prevalence of premenstrual dysphoric disorder in autism spectrum conditions (14.3%) compared with non-autistic women (9.5%). Those with autism spectrum conditions did experience increased menopausal complaints. These menopausal complaints were associated with higher levels of depression and autistic traits. In non-autistic women, menopausal complaints were associated with increased inattention, hyperactivity/impulsivity (i.e. attention deficit hyperactivity disorder traits), and depression. With this work, we show the important role that major reproductive milestones can have in an autistic woman's life.
34825582|a|Studies of autistic traits in the general population are becoming increasingly prevalent. In this letter to the editor, we caution researchers against framing and interpreting studies of autistic traits in the general population as extending to autism and implore them to be clear about when their study sample does and does not include autistic participants.
34825581|a|LAY ABSTRACT: The ability to deceive others is an important skill that usually develops in early childhood. In this review, we give an overview of studies that have examined deceptive behaviour in autistic children, adolescents and adults. We separated the study findings into three main categories and seven sub-categories: (1) Deception ability and prevalence (1a) gameplay deception; (1b) naturalistic deception; (2) Psychological processes in deception (2a) verbal, intellectual and social ability; (2b) ability to understand others' thoughts and beliefs; (2c) cognitive ability; and (3) Social learning (3a) training; (3b) social contexts. Contrary to some stereotypes, we found that autistic people can and do deceive but often find this more difficult than non-autistic people. We also found that autistic people may use different psychological processes than non-autistic people when deceiving and may get better at deception in adulthood.
34825580|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Most autistic adults experience mental health problems. There is a great demand for psychotherapeutic support that addresses the specific needs of autistic individuals. However, people with autism encounter difficulties trying to access diagnostic and therapeutic services. This study was conducted by a participatory autism research group: a group in which autistic individuals and scientists collaborate. The group developed a questionnaire for psychotherapists in Germany to assess their knowledge about autism. Psychotherapists also rated their ability to diagnose and treat autistic patients without intellectual disability, and patients with other psychological diagnoses. Many of the 498 psychotherapists that responded reported little knowledge and outdated beliefs about autism, as well as little training on treating patients with autism. Their expertise about other psychological conditions was more comprehensive. However, many psychotherapists were interested in professional training on autism. Those with more knowledge were also more open to treating autistic patients. In conclusion, psychotherapists' lack of knowledge and expertise seem to be a major barrier for adults with autism to receiving helpful psychotherapeutic support. The results demonstrate the need for an advancement in autism education during psychotherapists' training and in continuous education.
34825577|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Little is known about what parents can do to promote initiating joint attention for their toddlers with autism. Initiating joint attention is important because it is an indicator of social motivation and is associated with later communication ability. In this study, parents applied mediated learning principles to help their toddlers engage with them socially. The principles included helping their child focus on social interaction, giving meaning to the social elements of interaction (and de-emphasizing nonsocial elements), and helping their toddlers understand their own social ability by encouraging. At the end of the intervention period, we compared two groups. One group received the Joint Attention Mediated Learning intervention and the other received community-based early intervention services. We found that the Joint Attention Mediated Learning participants applied mediated learning principles more often than the other group. Then, we explored how parents' application of mediated learning principles related to toddler initiating joint attention and found that parents who were successful in applying the principles had toddlers who were more likely to show initiating joint attention. Our findings indicate that the mediated learning process shows promise as a way to promote early social learning, although other elements of the Joint Attention Mediated Learning intervention, such as actively engaging parents in the learning process, may have also contributed to both child and parent learning.
34825425|a|BACKGROUND: Mentally ill children with intellectual disabilities do not always receive the services they need for effective change at psychiatric hospitals, as their verbal limitations render standard procedures in diagnostics and therapy difficult or impossible, as their ability to transfer insights acquired in one setting to another is impaired and as their families and caretakers are often overwhelmed by their needs. This is why an integral vision for children with intellectual disabilities is presented. Drawing on three case reports, it is highlighted how an interdisciplinary approach, a changed hospital set-up and constant interplay between therapy and pedagogy, between services to the child and to its caregivers can help overcome these difficulties. METHOD: Case reports. CONCLUSIONS: Some children risk being mistakenly treated as intellectually disabled. If testing reveals, for example, autism with a mild learning disability, psychoeducation and the pedagogical training for (special school) personnel can help prevent underachievement and bring about a setting that can help the child flourish. Both sensitive care and pedagogical intervention that fit the developmental age of severely intellectually disabled children can prevent their receiving sedatives to treat aggressive behaviour. Substantial and lasting shifts in mood, even happiness can result if parents and caregivers get the pedagogical training and the assistance they need to take care of their children. Reliable and well-structured pedagogical training and environments can enhance and often substitute for unavailable therapeutic interventions for this specific group. With some profound intellectually and multiply disabled children, beginning medical treatment at home may not be safe. The (in)effectiveness of specific psychiatric medications needs to be monitored by observations however. For reliable results with intellectually disabled children, a clinical setting that resembles their everyday life is needed.
34825295|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are associated with cognitive dysfunctions, including mental time travel (MTT). However, findings on diminished MTT ability may be confounded by a number of factors, including the individuals' language ability, factors related to the MTT task and the demographic factors of participants. The present study provided a meta-analysis of MTT ability in people with ASD. The results showed significant overall reductions in MTT ability in people with ASD. Moderator analyses revealed that the variables examined did not explain the reduction in MTT ability. These findings suggest that MTT ability is diminished in people with ASD and that the degree of this diminishment may not depend on the characteristics of measures or demographic variables of people with ASD.
34824653|a|Foreign body ingestions are quite common and most often will uneventfully pass in stool, however, some ingestions, can lead to complications such as obstruction. If left untreated, this can lead to perforation and fistula formation. Hence, threshold for intervention should be low and diagnostic imaging can assist with treatment decisions. We present to you a case of 17-year-old male with non-verbal autism with an unusual hollow foreign body ingestion leading to small bowel obstruction.
34824512|a|Background: Sensory over-responsivity is an important factor influencing the ability of children with an autism spectrum disorder to receive proper oral care. Dental care remains the most prevalent, unmet health care need for children with special health care needs. Aim and objective: To assess the oral health of children with autism in special schools. Materials and methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted to record the oral health problems of 142 autistic children attending special schools across the suburbs of Mumbai city in India. Clinical examination was carried out for the presence of dental plaque, gingivitis, caries, restorations, traumatic injuries, and self-injurious habits. The participants were divided into three groups based on their age. Results: Children with primary and mixed dentition had a higher incidence of dental caries when compared with the permanent dentition group. Good oral hygiene was observed in the study population with a mean OHI-S score of 0.88 +- 0.79. Traumatic dental injuries, bruxism, drooling of saliva from the corner of the mouth, and self-injurious habits were also recorded. Conclusion: Due to the nature of their neurological deficit and difficulty in providing dental treatment, it is recommended that preventive dental care be enforced on these children. How to cite this article: Santosh A, Kakade A, Mali S, et al. Oral Health Assessment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder in Special Schools. Int J Clin Pediatr Dent 2021;14(4):548-553.
34824464|a|
34823622|a|The search for biomarkers for autism spectrum disorder (henceforth autism) has received a lot of attention due to their potential clinical relevance. The clinical and aetiological heterogeneity of autism suggests the presence of subgroups. The lack of identification of a valid diagnostic biomarker for autism, and the inconsistencies seen in studies assessing differences between autism and typically developing control groups, may be partially explained by the vast heterogeneity observed in autism. The focus now is to better understand the clinical and biological heterogeneity and identify stratification biomarkers, which are measures that describe subgroups of individuals with shared biology. Using stratification approaches to assess treatment within pre-defined subgroups could clarify who may benefit from different treatments and therapies, and ultimately lead to more effective individualised treatment plans.
34823458|a|Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder belonging to the autism spectrum disorder (ASD). In ASDs, the individuals show substantial impairments in social communication, repetitive behaviours, and sensory behaviours deficits in the early stages of their life. Globally, the prevalence of autism is estimated to be less than 1%, especially in high-income countries. In recent decades, there has been a drastic increase in the incidence of ASD, which has put ASD into the category of epidemics. Presently, two US Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs, aripiprazole and risperidone are used to treat symptoms of agitation and irritability in autistic children. However, to date, no medication has been found to treat the core symptoms of ASD. The adverse side effects of conventional medicine and limited treatment options have led families and parents of autistic children to turn to complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) treatments, which are perceived as relatively safe compared to conventional medicine. Recently, N,N-dimethylglycine (DMG), a dietary supplement, has emerged as a useful supplement to improve the mental and physical state of children with ASD. The current review discusses ASD, the prevalence of ASD, CAM approach and efficacy of CAM treatment in children with ASD. Moreover, it highlights the chemistry, pharmacological effect, and clinical studies of DMG, highlighting its potential for improving the lifestyle of children with ASD.
34823448|a|3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA/"ecstasy") is widespread in the electronic club scene, but MDMA has also been suggested for the treatment of anxiety spectrum disorders like posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and social anxiety in autistic adults. Here, we report a case of a high functioning 24-old student with a sporadic recreational use of ecstasy, and a history of a single episode of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). A few days after using ecstasy during a period of stressful life events, he developed a complex depersonalization/derealization syndrome (DDS) including intermittent distortions of time and very short intermittent episodes of misidentification of persons. Furthermore, obsessive thoughts reappeared and he suffered a panic attack for the first time in his life. Under combined pharmacological treatment and psychotherapy, symptoms gradually subsided until full remission after 14 months. Some months after discontinuation of escitalopram, however, panic attacks recurred, evolving into a regular pattern. Even if MDMA is a promising tool for the treatment of some anxiety spectrum disorders in the framework of substance-assisted psychotherapy, the use of ecstasy might be also harmful for some patients with a history of anxiety or dissociative symptoms, when used recreationally or as a self-medication outside of a controlled clinical setting.
34823273|a|PURPOSE: Therapeutic engagement is a key component of psychological interventions. Robot-assisted psychological interventions appear to have therapeutic benefits for service users that are challenging to engage. However, engagement with robots in robot-assisted psychological interventions is not well understood. The aim of this systematic review is to evaluate the quality of therapeutic engagement in robot-assisted psychological interventions (PROSPERO: 122437). METHODS: Scopus, Web of Science, PsycInfo, and Medline were searched until 15th January 2021 for studies which quantitatively evaluated therapeutic engagement in robot-assisted psychological interventions. The Effective Public Health Practice Project (EPHPP) quality assessment tool was used to assess methodological dimensions of studies. RESULTS: 3,647 studies were identified through database searching. Thirty studies (N=1,462), published between 2004 and 2020, and from 14 countries, were included. Robots were typically toy animals or humanoids and were used to provide support and improve wellbeing through social interaction. Studies primarily tested robots on older adults with dementia and children with autism and indicated positive therapeutic engagement. Twelve studies included a control group. EPHPP ratings were 'strong' (N=1), 'moderate' (N=10), and 'weak' (N=19). CONCLUSIONS: Therapeutic engagement between service users and robots is generally positive. Methodological limitations of studies, such as small sample sizes, and lack of control groups and longitudinal data, mean that the field is in early stages of its development and conclusions should be drawn with caution. There are important practical and ethical implications for policymakers to consider, such as responsible clinical practice and how service users may understand the therapeutic relationship with robots.
34823070|a|Hemiplegic cerebral palsy (CP), the most common subtype, is characterized by high levels of mobility. Despite this, children with hemiplegic CP can face challenges functioning in and adapting to situations of everyday life. The purpose of this cross-sectional study (Hemi-NET database) was to identify factors associated with adaptive behaviour in 59 children with hemiplegic CP (ages 4-18; GMFCS I-IV). Using multivariate regression analyses, the relationship between demographic, medical, and developmental factors and adaptive behaviour (measured by the Adaptive Skills Composite score of the BASC-2) was explored. Results indicate that 34% of children had impaired adaptive skills. An autism diagnosis and lower communication functioning were significantly associated with poorer adaptive skills (R2 = 0.42, F(4, 43) = 7.87, p < 0.001), while factors such as IQ scores and GMFCS level were not. The results contribute to the growing literature that suggests that clinicians and researchers need to look beyond motor functioning when working with individuals with CP.
34822816|a|Microduplication of the human 16p11.2 gene locus is associated with a range of neurodevelopmental outcomes, including autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Mice carrying heterozygous 16p11.2 duplication (16p11.2dp/+) display social deficits, which is attributable to impaired GABAergic synaptic function in prefrontal cortex (PFC) driven by downregulation of Npas4, an activity-dependent transcription factor that regulates GABA synapse formation. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the diminished transcription of Npas4 in 16p11.2 duplication remain unknown. Npas4 is one of the target genes regulated by histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5), an epigenetic enzyme repressing gene expression via removal of transcription-permissive acetyl groups from histones. Here we report that HDAC5 expression is elevated and histone acetylation is reduced at the Npas4 promoter in PFC of 16p11.2dp/+ mice. Treatment with the HDAC5 inhibitor LMK235 normalizes histone acetylation, restores GABAergic signaling in PFC, and significantly improves social preference in 16p11.2dp/+ mice. These findings suggest that HDAC5 inhibition is a promising therapeutic avenue to alleviate genetic, synaptic and behavioral deficits in 16p11.2 duplication conditions.
34822048|a|PURPOSE: To compare mothers and fathers perceptions of the impact of autism spectrum disorder on their Quality of Life (QoL), we used the Parental-Developmental Disorders-Quality of Life scale (Par-DD-QoL). METHOD: The perception of QoL of mothers and fathers was compared for 130 pairs of parents of children with ASD and the associated variables were investigated. RESULTS: Mothers perceived a significantly greater impact of ASD on their QoL than fathers. Parents perceived a higher impact of ASD on global QoL when their child's adaptive skills were low and when the level of aberrant behaviors was high. More precisely, the perception of QoL by the mothers was negatively associated with their child's internalized disorders, whereas the perception of QoL by the fathers was negatively associated with their child's externalized disorders. Neither the mothers' nor the fathers' perception of the impact on QoL was associated with their children's age or the severity of their autistic symptoms. Some parental factors, such as being members of a family association, having benefited from training in ASD and having experienced a disruption in professional activity were associated with a greater impact on their QoL. CONCLUSION: Our finding that the perceived impact of ASD on QoL differed between mothers and fathers argues for individualized psychosocial support. Moreover, the strong correlation between the child's clinical characteristics and the perception by parents of a higher impact of ASD on QoL should be seen as red flag concerning the needs of the parents in terms of social and educational support. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT02625116 (October 2015).
34821968|a|This editorial comment refers to the article: "Diagnosing autism spectrum disorder in children using conventional MRI and apparent diffusion coefficient based deep learning algorithms" by Guo et al. (Eur Radiol, 2021). KEY POINTS:  Deep learning may help to uncover imaging features of autism spectrum disorder on MRI.
34821620|a|Given the characteristics of people with Autism Spectrum Disorder, it is evident the difficulties they show in the development of social skills. The scarce participation of people with Autism Spectrum Disorder in group sports can be taken as a reference. The aim of this study was to analyse the impact of football on the development of social skills in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder. In order to measure the sporting impact, it was necessary to implement a football training programme with the intention of evaluating different social skills. Thirteen children participated in the programme, all of them with a diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder and with a severity level of 1. The study was based on a pre-experimental, pre-test/post-test design. Non-parametric tests were used for the statistical analysis, applying the Wilcoxon test. Two specific tools on social skills were used for data collection. The results showed a generalised improvement in the dimensions linked to the social skills assessed. This highlights the possibility of considering group sport as an alternative to be taken into account to work on and enhance social skills in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder.
34821617|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a chronic and persistent pervasive developmental disorder (PDD) whose characteristic deficit is represented by social difficulties, semantic-pragmatic alterations and a limited, unusual and repetitive pattern of interests and behaviors. Specifically, individuals with high-functioning autism (HFA) frequently exhibit associated internalizing symptoms that are not part of the diagnostic criteria but which, nonetheless, tend to impair daily functioning. In this study, we investigated how some forms of treatment could be useful in subjects with HFA who display internalizing symptoms. Theoretical background relates to standard cognitive therapy (SCT) and rational education training with mindfulness (M-ERE). METHODS: In this study, we investigated how some forms of treatment could be useful in subjects with HFA and internalizing symptoms, focusing on standard cognitive therapy (SCT) and mindfulness associated with emotional rational education training (M-ERE). We selected two groups of HFA patients with significant internalizing symptoms and performed two different forms of treatment for six months: SCT and M-ERE. The aim of the study was to verify the effectiveness of an M-ERE protocol with respect to anxious and depressive symptoms in subjects with HFA. Furthermore, we wanted to compare the results obtained with this combined treatment with those obtained in HFA subjects treated with SCT. RESULTS: Our analyses showed an improvement in the internalizing symptoms (especially those related to the anxiety dimension) of the group that followed a treatment based on mindfulness and rational emotional education for 6 months compared to the group that had instead performed a 6-month treatment based on the SCT. CONCLUSIONS: Our hypotheses were supported by the results, which highlighted the efficacy of mindfulness-based interventions in the treatment of internalizing symptoms in adolescents with HFA, and specifically showed that an M-ERE intervention appears more effective in managing anxiety compared to treatment with SCT and appears to be equally effective in the management of depressive symptoms. Not only was the M-ERE treatment effective for the management of anxious and depressive symptoms in subjects with HFA, but the efficacy for the management of anxious symptoms was greater than the SCT treatment.
34821460|a|We describe clinical details, including novel findings, of two further children with the newly defined TLK2-related disorder. One patient was recruited to the Deciphering Developmental Delay (DDD) Study to identify underlying etiology of global developmental delay. The other was detected on whole-exome sequencing as part of second line investigations following normal microarray. Both patients were found to have de novo heterozygous pathogenic TLK2 variants. A novel c.6del p.(Glu3Lysfs*) loss-of-function frameshift variant was found in Patient 1. A c.1121+1G>A splice-donor variant was detected in Patient 2. TLK2-related neurodevelopmental disorder is a specific syndrome that has been recently described. Global developmental delay, behavioral problems, gastrointestinal disorders, and typical facial dysmorphism are common features. Neuropsychiatric disorders, ophthalmic, musculoskeletal and cranial abnormalities, as well as short stature, have also all been described. The novel findings we describe include sleep disturbance, nondifferentiation of lateral semi-circular canals (where asymmetric semi-circular canals were a feature in the previous cohort), vesico-ureteric reflux, and bilateral periauricular skin tags. Here, we report a novel TLK2 variant and previously undescribed features of TLK2-related disorder, to expand the clinical phenotype and provide further genotype-phenotype correlation.
34821431|a|OBJECTIVE: Randomised controlled trial (RCT) in adults with anorexia nervosa (AN) showed that Cognitive Remediation Therapy (CRT) enhances cognitive flexibility, abstract thinking and quality-of-life. Despite inconsistent findings, CRT has the potential as an adjunct treatment for young people (YP) with AN. A feasibility RCT was conducted in an inpatient setting. The study will also consider the effect of CRT in YP with AN and autistic symptoms. METHODS: Participants were randomly allocated to the Immediate or Delayed condition to receive individual CRT sessions, in addition to standard treatment. A repeated measures design was conducted. RESULTS: Eighty participants were recruited. The neuropsychological measures were feasible for evaluating individual CRT in YP. Significant improvements in set-shifting and central coherence were found, with no main effect between immediate and delayed condition. Significant interactions were found between the condition, and autism spectrum condition (ASC) and No-ASC subgroup, with significant positive impact of CRT on set-shifting in the No-ASC subgroup. There was some evidence that for the No-ASC subgroup, CRT was more effective if delivered at the start of the treatment; and for the ASC subgroup, that CRT was more effective if delivered at the later stage of treatment. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the overall positive effect of CRT in set-shifting and central coherence alongside standard treatment. They also indicate the importance of screening for the presence of ASC which could require tailored CRT.
34821355|a|Background: Absolute pitch is the ability to identify a given note in the absence of a reference note. The prevalence of absolute pitch in autism is between 5% and 11% and autism involves notably enhanced abilities in pitch discrimination. Objectives: To summarize the evidence about the role and the meaning of these special skills in autism. Methods: Systematic electronic database searches were conducted using Pubmed, Scopus, Psycinfo, and Web of Science. The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRI-SMA) guideline was followed, and, after thorough screening by two independent reviewers, 17 articles remained eligible for inclusion in this study. Results: We have two different groups of results. Eight case-control studies discuss pitch discrimination and autism. The second group included four case reports about autistic individuals with absolute pitch and five case-control studies. These results strongly suggest that music elicits special attention for children with autism, and taken together, this evidence supports a major frequency of AP in autistic children. Conclusion: Based on this evidence, future perspectives could include studies aiming to detect absolute pitch at an early age and to use this special skill to stimulate joint attention, as well as socio-communicative skills.
34821185|a|INTRODUCTION: . Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) experience difficulties in Executive Functions (EF) performances. However, efficacy of EF intervention needs to be further investigated. OBJECTIVE: to evaluate the efficacy of different EF interventions in children and adolescents with ASD. METHODS: A systematic review and meta-analysis were carried out according to PRISMA guidelines. Relevant databases including Pubmed, Psychinfo, Scopus and Web of Science were searched up to November 2019. Papers included in the study have the following characteristics: randomized controlled trial or quasi-experimental design and be published in English or Spanish. RESULTS: After the elimination of duplicates, 949 were screened. Among these six were included in the systematic review. The main approaches for EF in ASD were computer-based interventions, cognitive-behavioral therapy and assisted-animal therapy. Statistically significant results (p=0.003) were found in using exergames. CONCLUSION: Different approaches can be used for improving EF intervention, with positive effects on working memory, behavior, and flexibility.
34820930|a|BACKGROUND: Definitions of recovery from an eating disorder (ED) have generally been formulated around clinical conceptualisations, rather than based on the views of patients. This paper therefore asked those with lived experience of ED for their own definitions of recovery. METHOD: Data were collected as part of an online study looking at EDs, autism and relationships. About 173 participants identified as recovered from ED and gave free-response definitions of recovery. Responses were subject to thematic analysis. RESULTS: Seven major themes were identified: Weight restoration, lack of ED behaviours, thoughts and behaviours, cognitions, emotional responses, getting on with life, and ongoing challenges. CONCLUSIONS: Many definitions of recovery given by those who have lived experience of ED echoed those used by clinicians and researchers. There were also points of divergence around the ongoing challenges of recovery. Our findings highlight the need for continuing support post-weight restoration to facilitate the successful long-term recovery for those with ED.
34820881|a|Non-coding DNA (ncDNA) refers to the portion of the genome that does not code for proteins and accounts for the greatest physical proportion of the human genome. ncDNA includes sequences that are transcribed into RNA molecules, such as ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs), microRNAs (miRNAs), long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), and un-transcribed sequences that have regulatory functions, including gene promoters and enhancers. Variation in non-coding regions of the genome have an established role in human disease, with growing evidence from many areas, including several cancers, Parkinson's disease and autism. Here, we review the features and functions of the regulatory elements that are present in the non-coding genome and the role that these regions have in human disease. We then review the existing research in epilepsy and emphasise the potential value of further exploring non-coding regulatory elements in epilepsy. In addition, we outline the most widely used techniques for recognising regulatory elements throughout the genome, current methodologies for investigating variation and the main challenges associated with research in the field of non-coding DNA.
34820660|a|The Global Alliance for Genomics and Health (GA4GH) supports international standards that enable a federated data sharing model for the research community while respecting data security, ethical and regulatory frameworks, and data authorization and access processes for sensitive data. The GA4GH Passport standard (Passport) defines a machine-readable digital identity that conveys roles and data access permissions (called "visas") for individual users. Visas are issued by data stewards, including data access committees (DACs) working with public databases, the entities responsible for the quality, integrity, and access arrangements for the datasets in the management of human biomedical data. Passports streamline management of data access rights across data systems by using visas that present a data user's digital identity and permissions across organizations, tools, environments, and services. We describe real-world implementations of the GA4GH Passport standard in use cases from ELIXIR Europe, National Institutes of Health, and the Autism Sharing Initiative. These implementations demonstrate that the Passport standard has provided transparent mechanisms for establishing permissions and authorizing data access across platforms.
34820601|a|Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is an inherited intellectual disability with a high risk for comorbid autism spectrum disorders. Since FXS is a genetic disease, patients are more susceptible to environmental factors aggravating symptomatology. However, this confounding interaction between FXS environmental and genetic risk factors is under-investigated. Here, Fmr1 knock-out (KO) mice and the immune stimulus lipopolysaccharide (LPS) were used to explore this interaction between FXS development and inflammation in microglia, the brain's primary immune cell. Our results demonstrate that Fmr1 KO and wild-type (WT) microglia are not different in inflammatory outcomes without LPS. However, Fmr1 KO microglia produces an elevated pro-inflammatory and phagocytic response following LPS treatment when compared to WT microglia. Our experiments also revealed baseline differences in mitochondrial function and morphology between WT and Fmr1 KO microglia, which LPS treatment exaggerated. Our data suggest an altered inflammatory mechanism in Fmr1 KO microglia implicating a gene and environment interaction.
34820485|a|Bisphenol-A (BPA) and bisphenol-S (BPS) are endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) found primarily in plastics. Estrogen is a primary hormonal regulator of skeletal growth and development; however, the impact of gestational BPA or BPS exposure on skeletal health of offspring remains relatively unknown. Here, adult female mice were randomized into three treatment groups: 200 mug BPA/kg BW (BPA), 200 mug BPS/kg BW (BPS) or control (CON). Animals were then further randomized to exercising (EX) or sedentary (SED) groups. Treatment continued through mating, gestation, and lactation. One male offspring from each dam (n = 6-8/group) was assessed at 16 weeks of age to evaluate effects of EDC exposure on the adult skeleton. Cortical geometry of the mid-diaphysis and trabecular microarchitecture of the distal femur were assessed via micro-CT. Biomechanical strength and mineral apposition rate of the femoral diaphysis were assessed via three-point bending and dynamic histomorphometry, respectively. Two-factor ANOVA or ANCOVA were used to determine the effects of maternal EX and BPA or BPS on trabecular and cortical bone outcomes. Maternal EX led to a significant decrease in body fat percentage and bone stiffness, independent of EDC exposure. Offspring exposed to BPA had significantly lower trabecular bone volume, trabecular number, connectivity density, cortical thickness, and greater trabecular spacing compared to BPS or CON animals. In conclusion, gestational BPA, but not BPS, exposure negatively impacted trabecular microarchitecture and cortical geometry in adult male offspring. If these findings translate to humans, this could have significant public health impacts on expecting women or those seeking to become pregnant.
34820140|a|Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have a higher prevalence of pain compared to those without ASD. Pain is a leading cause of morbidity and disability worldwide and may contribute to adverse health outcomes in people with ASD, thus warranting further research on this special population. The present study used data from 1,423 children with ASD and 46,023 children without ASD and their mothers from the combined 2016-2017 National Survey of Children's Health. Mothers reported child pain and ASD status and their own mental health status. Mothers reporting a status of "Fair or Poor" were considered as having maternal mental health conditions (MMHCs) for the purposes of this study. Children with and without ASD who had mothers with MMHCs had higher odds of pain compared to children with mothers without MMHCs. These increased odds did not attenuate as a result of controlling for co-occurring neurological conditions, which have been associated with increased pain in children with ASD. Thus, parent mental health may alter perception and/or reports of pain on behalf of children with and without ASD. Future research should include more detailed assessments of parent mental health and clinical assessments of children in order to explore the role of parent mental health in the experiences of pain and other symptoms present in children with ASD.
34819903|a|The present research was done to examine whether social support was related to subjective well-being on Chinese parents of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and how perceived discrimination affected this relationship. Two hundred four parents with ASD children were investigated by Inventory of Social Support Behavior, Perceived Discrimination Scale for Parents of Children With ASD, Subjective Well-being Scale. The results showed that perceived discrimination was negatively associated with social support and subjective well-being, and social support was positively related to subjective well-being. Furthermore, perceived discrimination played a partial mediating role between social support and subjective well-being. All the findings suggest that social support can directly influence subjective well-being of parents of ASD children and indirectly influence subjective well-being through perceived discrimination.
34819882|a|Difficulties with pragmatic language (i.e., language in social contexts, such as conversational ability) are a noted characteristic of the language profiles of both fragile X syndrome (FXS) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), conditions which show significant phenotypic overlap. Understanding the origins and developmental course of pragmatic language problems in FXS and other developmental conditions associated with language impairment is a critical step for the development of targeted interventions to promote communicative competence across the lifespan. This study examined pragmatic language in the context of parent-child interactions in school-age children with FXS (who did and did not meet ASD criteria on the ADOS; n = 85), idiopathic ASD (n = 32), Down syndrome (DS; n = 38), and typical development (TD; n = 39), and their parents. Parent-child communicative interactions were examined across multiple contexts, across groups, and in relationship to pragmatic language outcomes assessed 2 years later. Results showed both overlapping and divergent patterns across the FXS-ASD and idiopathic ASD child and parent groups, and also highlighted key differences in pragmatic profiles based on situational context, with more pragmatic language difficulties occurring for both ASD groups in less structured interactions. Differences in parental language styles during parent-child interactions were associated with child language outcomes, likely reflecting the complex interplay of discourse style inherent to a parent, with the inevitable influence of child characteristics on parent language as well. Together, findings help delineate the dynamic and multifactorial nature of impaired pragmatic skills among children with FXS and other neurodevelopmental disorders associated with language impairment, with potential implications for the development of targeted interventions for pragmatic communication skills.
34819846|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a group of lifelong neurodevelopmental disorders with complicated causes. A key symptom of ASD patients is their impaired interpersonal communication ability. Recent study shows that face scanning patterns of individuals with ASD are often different from those of typical developing (TD) ones. Such abnormality motivates us to study the feasibility of identifying ASD children based on their face scanning patterns with machine learning methods. In this paper, we consider using the bag-of-words (BoW) model to encode the face scanning patterns, and propose a novel dictionary learning method based on dual mode seeking for better BoW representation. Unlike k-means which is broadly used in conventional BoW models to learn dictionaries, the proposed method captures discriminative information by finding atoms which maximizes both the purity and coverage of belonging samples within one class. Compared to the rich literature of ASD studies from psychology and neural science, our work marks one of the relatively few attempts to directly identify high-functioning ASD children with machine learning methods. Experiments demonstrate the superior performance of our method with considerable gain over several baselines. Although the proposed work is yet too preliminary to directly replace existing autism diagnostic observation schedules in the clinical practice, it shed light on future applications of machine learning methods in early screening of ASD.
34819342|a|Predictive coding accounts of brain functions profoundly influence current approaches to perceptual synthesis. However, a fundamental paradox has emerged, that may be very relevant for understanding hallucinations, psychosis or cognitive inflexibility: in some situations surprise or prediction error related responses can decrease when predicted and yet, they can increase when we know they are predictable. This paradox is resolved by recognizing that brain responses reflect precision-weighted prediction error. This presses us to disambiguate the contributions of precision and prediction error in electrophysiology. To meet this challenge for the first time, we appeal to a methodology that couples an original experimental paradigm with fine dynamic modelling. We examined brain responses in healthy human participants (N = 20; 10 Female) to unexpected and expected surprising sounds, assuming that the latter yield a smaller prediction error but much more amplified by a larger precision weight. Importantly, addressing this modulation requires the modelling of trial-by-trial variations of brain responses, that we reconstructed within a fronto-temporal network by combining EEG and MEG. Our results reveal an adaptive learning of surprise with larger integration of past (relevant) information in the context of expected surprises. Within the auditory hierarchy, this adaptation was found tied down to specific connections and reveals in particular precision encoding through neuronal excitability. Strikingly, these fine processes are automated as sound sequences were unattended. These findings directly speak to applications in psychiatry, where specifically impaired precision weighting has been suggested to be at the heart of several conditions such as schizophrenia and autism.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENTIn perception as Bayesian inference and learning, context sensitivity expresses as the precision weighting of prediction errors. A subtle mechanism that is thought to lie at the heart of several psychiatric conditions. It is thus critical to identify its neurophysiological and computational underpinnings. We revisit the passive auditory oddball paradigm by manipulating sound predictability and use a twofold modelling approach to simultaneous EEG-MEG recordings: (i) trial-by-trial modelling of cortical responses reveals a context-sensitive perceptual learning process; (ii) the dynamic causal modelling of evoked responses uncovers the associated changes in synaptic efficacy. Predictability discloses a link between precision weighting and self-inhibition of superficial pyramidal cells, a result that paves the way to a fine description of healthy and pathological perception.
34818942|a|Diagnosis is a profoundly social phenomenon which, while putatively identifying disease entities, also provides insights into how societies understand and explain health, illness and deviance. In this paper, we explore how diagnosis becomes part of popular culture through its use in many non-clinical settings. From historical diagnosis of long-deceased public personalities to media diagnoses of prominent politicians and even diagnostic analysis of fictitious characters, the diagnosis does meaningful social work, explaining diversity and legitimising deviance in the popular imagination. We discuss a range of diagnostic approaches from paleopathography to fictopathography, which all take place outside of the clinic. Through pathography, diagnosis creeps into widespread and everyday domains it has not occupied previously, performing medicalisation through popularisation. We describe how these pathographies capture, not the disorders of historical or fictitious figures, rather, the anxieties of a contemporary society, eager to explain deviance in ways that helps to make sense of the world, past, present and imaginary.
34818937|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Despite being highly prevalent among people with autism, restricted and unusual interests remain under-researched and poorly understood. This article confirms that restricted interests are very frequent and varied among children and adolescents with autism. It also further extends current knowledge in this area by characterizing the relationship between the presence, number, and type of restricted interests with chronological age, sex, cognitive functioning, and social and communication symptoms.
34818076|a|Objective: Psychiatric comorbidity is common in fragile X syndrome (FXS) and often addressed through pharmacological management. Here we examine data in the Fragile X Online Registry With Accessible Research Database (FORWARD) to characterize specific symptoms being treated with psychotropic medication, patterns of medication use, as well as the influence of gender, intellectual disability (ID), age, and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) diagnosis. Methods: Data were drawn from the 975 participants who have a completed clinician form. We explored the frequency of psychotropic medication use for the following symptom clusters: attention, hyperactivity, anxiety, hypersensitivity, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), mood swings, irritability/agitation, aggression, and self-injury (IAAS). Results: A majority of participants (617 or 63.3%) were taking a psychotropic medication, including investigational drugs. Medications were often targeting multiple symptoms. Psychotropic medication use was more common in males, adolescents, and those with comorbid ID and ASD. Anxiety was the most frequently targeted symptom, followed by attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder symptoms and IAAS. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) were the most frequently prescribed medication class among all patients (n = 266, 43%), followed by stimulants (n = 235, 38%), each with no gender difference. Antipsychotics were the third most frequently prescribed medication class (n = 205, 33%), and were more frequently prescribed to males and those with ID and ASD. Conclusions: Anxiety, attention and hyperactivity were the most common symptom targets for psychopharmacologic intervention in FXS. Our results support clinical knowledge that males with comorbid ASD and ID have a more severe presentation requiring more intervention including medications. These results highlight the need for examination of symptom overlap and interaction.
34817769|a|This longitudinal study examined how receptive and expressive vocabulary assessments capture vocabulary development in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and typically developing (TD) children. Using mixed regression modelling, we explored when children with ASD significantly different from TD children. We also examined the variability of individual trajectories of vocabulary development in children with ASD. Children with ASD showed slowed trajectories and significantly differed from TD children by 24 months on all assessments except for picture-based assessments. Children with ASD also showed high heterogeneity in trajectories, with some showing inconsistent patterns of growth, stagnation, and regression across assessments. This suggests that conclusions based on individual assessments of vocabulary can vary and assessment characteristics must be considered when monitoring vocabulary development.
34817594|a|IMPORTANCE: Occupational therapy using an Ayres Sensory Integration  (ASI) approach is a common intervention that has not been extensively studied in children with idiopathic sensory processing and integration challenges (e.g., without a diagnosis of autism). OBJECTIVE: To test the effectiveness of ASI using measures related to motor coordination and functional performance in children with a sensory-based motor disorder (SBMD). DESIGN: Nonconcurrent, multiple baseline, single subject. SETTING: Outpatient clinic that was part of a children's hospital in an urban setting. PARTICIPANTS: Three boys (ages 5-8 yr) with an SBMD. INTERVENTION: Each participant received ASI 3 times per week for 10 wk. Outcomes and Measures: Three motor probes were measured weekly. Pre- and posttest assessments included goal attainment scaling (GAS) and the Bruininks-Oseretsky Test of Motor Proficiency-Second Edition (BOT-2). RESULTS: All 3 participants showed improvements in motor probes during the intervention period on the basis of a 2 SD band method of analysis. Statistically significant improvements were noted across GAS goals, and positive changes were found on the BOT-2, with large effect sizes. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Findings suggest improved motor performance and high goal achievement using ASI for children with idiopathic sensory processing and integration challenges. What This Article Adds: This study adds to a body of literature suggesting that ASI is effective in increasing functional performance in children with sensory processing and integration challenges. Future studies using multiple baseline designs are feasible in the clinic setting and can help build the evidence base for ASI.
34817591|a|IMPORTANCE: Robust and psychometrically sound performance-based outcome measures are needed for clinical trials of occupational therapy interventions for children with autism. OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate a systematic approach for choosing psychometrically sound performance-based outcome measures of daily living skills and socialization for use in clinical trials of occupational therapy interventions for children with autism. DESIGN: Rapid literature review to identify appropriate measures for studies with this population followed by quality indicator ratings and a nominal group process. SETTING: University. PARTICIPANTS: Four experts in autism and pediatric outcome measurement. Outcomes and Measures: Twenty-one outcome measures of daily living skills and socialization were identified and reviewed. RESULTS: Seven measures met the inclusion criteria. The Assessment of Motor and Process Skills and the Evaluation of Social Interaction-Second Edition, received the highest ratings and group consensus. Several other measures were also scored highly. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Careful assessment of psychometric properties is an important component of choosing outcome measures for a clinical trial, but burden of assessment and study objectives are important considerations. What This Article Adds: This project demonstrates use of a systematic process for choosing outcome measures for a planned clinical trial.
34817560|a|Importance: Although the association between several recurrent genomic copy number variants (CNVs) and mental disorders has been studied for more than a decade, unbiased, population-based estimates of the prevalence, disease risks and trajectories, fertility, and mortality to contrast chromosomal abnormalities and advance precision health care are lacking. Objective: To generate unbiased, population-based estimates of prevalence, disease risks and trajectories, fertility, and mortality of CNVs implicated in neuropsychiatric disorders. Design, Setting, and Participants: In a population-based case-cohort study, using the Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research (iPSYCH) 2012 database, individuals born between May 1, 1981, and December 31, 2005, and followed up until December 31, 2012, were analyzed. All individuals (n = 57 377) with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), major depressive disorder (MDD), schizophrenia (SCZ), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), or bipolar disorder (BPD) were included, as well as 30 000 individuals randomly drawn from the database. Data analysis was conducted from July 1, 2017, to September 7, 2021. Exposures: Copy number variants at 6 genomic loci (1q21.1, 15q11.2, 15q13.3, 16p11.2, 17p12, and 17q12). Main Outcomes and Measures: Population-unbiased hazard ratio (HR) and survival estimates of CNV associations with the 5 ascertained psychiatric disorders, epilepsy, intellectual disability, selected somatic disorders, fertility, and mortality. Results: Participants' age ranged from 1 to 32 years (mean, 12.0 [IQR, 6.9] years) during follow-up, and 38 662 were male (52.3%). Copy number variants broadly associated with an increased risk of autism spectrum disorder and ADHD, whereas risk estimates of SCZ for most CNVs were lower than previously reported. Comparison with previous studies suggests that the lower risk estimates are associated with a higher CNV prevalence in the general population than in control samples of most case-control studies. Significant risk of major depressive disorder (HR, 5.8; 95% CI, 1.5-22.2) and sex-specific risk of bipolar disorder (HR, 17; 95% CI, 1.5-189.3, in men only) were noted for the 1q21.1 deletion. Although CNVs at 1q21.1 and 15q13.3 were associated with increased risk across most diagnoses, the 17p12 deletion consistently conferred less risk of psychiatric disorders (HR 0.4-0.8), although none of the estimates differed significantly from the general population. Trajectory analyses noted that, although diagnostic risk profiles differed across loci, they were similar for deletions and duplications within each locus. Sex-stratified analyses suggest that pathogenicity of many CNVs may be modulated by sex. Conclusions and Relevance: The findings of this study suggest that the iPSYCH population case cohort reveals broad disease risk for some of the studied CNVs and narrower risk for others, in addition to sex differential liability. This finding on genomic risk variants at the level of a population may be important for health care planning and clinical decision making, and thus the advancement of precision health care.
34816341|a|This manuscript aimed to advance our understanding of inhibitory control (IC) in autism spectrum disorders (ASD), adopting a meta-analytic multilevel approach. The first meta-analysis, on 164 studies adopting direct measures, indicated a significant small-to-medium (g = 0.484) deficit in the group with ASD (n = 5140) compared with controls (n = 6075). Similar effect sizes between response inhibition and interference control were found, but they were differentially affected by intellectual functioning and age. The second meta-analysis, on 24 studies using indirect measures, revealed a large deficit (g = 1.334) in the group with ASD (n = 985) compared with controls (n = 1300). Presentation format, intellectual functioning, and age were significant moderators. The effect of comorbidity with ADHD was not statistically significant. Implications are discussed for IC research and practice in autism.
34816340|a|We examined the effects of insurance type on health service utilization among children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) following autism insurance reform by analyzing the most recent data from the 2019 National Survey of Children's Health. Families with private insurance were less likely to report that their health insurance covered needed services compared to families with public insurance. Privately versus publicly insured children were not significantly different in receiving behavioral or medication treatment, or in parental frustration in efforts to obtain services. However, parents' frustration escalated with increased ASD severity. Findings from this study suggest the need for continuing to improve implementation of health insurance reform legislation and providing adequate ASD-related services for children with private insurance.
34816186|a|This study aimed to investigate health service utilization among women with mental state disorder only (MSD-PD), mental state disorder plus personality disorder (MSD+PD), and controls in a population-based sample. Women (n = 635) from the Geelong Osteoporosis Study completed mental health assessments and were categorized into groups (MSD-PD, MSD+PD, controls). General practitioner (mental and non-mental health encounters) and specialized mental health service utilization was ascertained from data linkage to the Medicare Benefits Schedule, Australia (01/09/2008-31/12/2012). Negative binomial and binary logistic regression models were employed to assess health service utilization differences between groups. Results indicated that women with MSD+PD had more encounters of non-mental health service utilization than women with MSD-PD and controls. Age significantly modified these relationships: women with MSD+PD and MSD-PD had more encounters of health service utilization at midlife and in the seventh decade of life. No significant differences were found in the frequency of general practitioner mental health service utilization or specialized mental health service utilization between groups. These data suggest that the presence of co-occurring PD is associated with increased health service utilization among women with other common mental health problems. Healthcare providers should be vigilant to the presence of PD when establishing management plans with patients presenting with common mental health problems.
34816099|a|A single protein can be multifaceted depending on the cellular contexts and interacting molecules. LIN28A is an RNA-binding protein that governs developmental timing, cellular proliferation, differentiation, stem cell pluripotency, and metabolism. In addition to its best-known roles in microRNA biogenesis, diverse molecular roles have been recognized. In the nervous system, LIN28A is known to play critical roles in proliferation and differentiation of neural progenitor cells (NPCs). We profiled the endogenous LIN28A-interacting proteins in NPCs differentiated from human induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells using immunoprecipitation and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. We identified over 500 LIN28A-interacting proteins, including 156 RNA-independent interactors. Functions of these proteins span a wide range of gene regulatory processes. Prompted by the interactome data, we revealed that LIN28A may impact the subcellular distribution of its interactors and stress granule formation upon oxidative stress. Overall, our analysis opens multiple avenues for elaborating molecular roles and characteristics of LIN28A.
34815987|a|Self-grooming is an innate, cephalo-caudal progression of body cleaning behaviors that are found in normal rodents but exhibit repetitive and stereotyped patterns in several mouse models, such as autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). It is also recognized as a marker of stress and anxiety. Mice with Shank3B gene knockout (KO) exhibit typical ASD-like behavioral abnormalities, including stereotyped self-grooming and increased levels of anxiety. However, the exact relationship between anxiety and stereotyped self-grooming in certain types of animal models is not clear. We selected three animal models with high anxiety to compare their self-grooming parameters. First, we confirmed that Shank3B KO mice (ASD model), acute restraint stress mouse model (stress model), and chronic inflammatory pain mouse model (pain model) all showed increased anxiety levels in the open field test (OFT) and elevated plus maze (EPM). We found that only the ASD model and the stress model produced increased total grooming duration. The pain model only exhibited an increasing trend of mean self-grooming duration. We used the grooming analysis algorithm to examine the self-grooming microstructure and assess the cephalo-caudal progression of grooming behavior. The results showed distinct self-grooming microstructures in these three models. The anxiolytic drug diazepam relieved the anxiety level and the total time of grooming in the ASD and stress models. The grooming microstructure was not restored in Shank3B KO mice but was partially relieved in the stress model, which suggested that anxiety aggravated stereotyped self-grooming duration but not the grooming microstructure in the ASD mouse model. Our results indicated that stereotyped behavior and anxiety may be shared by separate, but interacting, neural circuits in distinct disease models, which may be useful to understand the mechanisms and develop potential treatments for stereotyped behaviors and anxiety.
34814435|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD), a representative disease of children's neurodevelopmental disorders, brings huge pressure and financial burden to families and society. It is of great significance to explore its etiology and pathogenesis. Therefore, we established an ASD Cohort based on the existing China National Birth Cohort (CNBC), which applied parallel design to recruit and follow up families who achieved pregnancy after receiving assisted reproductive technologies (ART) and families with spontaneous conception. The main aims of this study are to compare the incidence of ASD among children born after ART with those born under spontaneous pregnancy, and to evaluate the impact of ART on the neurobehavioral development of offspring. Additionally, with a variety of clinical and behavioral related information collected during pregnancy and at early life of offspring, we are able to investigate the risk factors associated with ASD comprehensively. This article briefly introduces the objectives, contents, preliminary progress, strength and limitations, as well as further prospects of the ASD cohort study, mainly focusing on the overall design and current progress.
34814171|a|This study assessed 155 healthcare providers, from nine disciplines, who work professionally with people with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD). Using a national, web-based survey, respondents rated their experience, comfort, and competence in treating individuals with different disability types and preferred methods of continuing education; respondents also provided suggestions for attracting others to work with the IDD population. Findings revealed that experiences, comfort, and competence were all higher concerning persons with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellectual disability (ID), lower for those with deaf-blindness. Overall, levels of experience exceeded levels of comfort, which in turn exceeded levels of competence. The most helpful venues for continued training involved day-to-day contact with persons with IDD, which also characterized open-ended responses. Research and practical implications are discussed.
34813825|a|Recent years have seen an impressive amount of research devoted to understanding the etiopathology of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and developing therapies for this syndrome. Because of the lack of biomarkers of ASD, this work has been largely based on the behavioral characterization of rodent models, based on a multitude of genetic and environmental manipulations. Here we highlight how the endocannabinoid system (ECS) has recently emerged within this context of mouse behavioral studies as an etiopathological factor in ASD and a valid potential therapeutic target. We summarize the most recent results showing alterations of the ECS in rodent models of ASD, and demonstrating ASD-like behaviors in mice with altered ECS, induced either by genetic or pharmacological manipulations. We also give a critical overview of the most relevant advances in designing treatments and novel mouse models for ASD targeting the ECS, highlighting the relevance of thorough and innovative behavioral approaches to investigate the mechanisms acting underneath the complex features of ASD.
34813724|a|ObjectiveTo compare rates of aggression victimization for autistic vs. non-autistic U.S. college students. Participants: n = 1,411 autistic and n = 218,430 non-autistic students from 78 colleges. Methods: We used a three-way interaction term to examine moderation of the relationship between autism and sexual, physical and emotional aggression victimization by depression and sense of belonging. Results: Autistic students were nearly twice as likely as non-autistic students to report past-year emotional victimization (44% vs. 26%, p < 0.001), and more likely to report physical victimization (8.4% vs. 5.7%, p < 0.001). Autistic students who experienced sexual assault were 2.23 times more likely than non-autistic students to report it affected academic performance (80.4% vs. 36.0%, p < 0.001). At both low and high levels of depression, sense of belonging was protective against physical and sexual victimization for autistic students more than for non-autistic students. Conclusions: Institutions of higher education should prioritize preventing and responding to interpersonal aggression against autistic students.
34813183|a|Chronic constipation is common among children with ASD and is associated with more severe hyperactivity, anxiety, irritability, and repetitive behaviors. Young autistic children with chronic constipation display higher urinary, and foecal concentrations of p-cresol, an aromatic compound produced by gut bacteria, known to negatively affect brain function. Acute p-cresol administration to BTBR mice enhances anxiety, hyperactivity and stereotypic behaviors, while blunting social interaction. This study was undertaken to prospectively assess the behavioral effects of gut mobilization in young autistic children with chronic constipation, and to verify their possible correlation with urinary p-cresol. To this aim, 21 chronically constipated autistic children 2-8 years old were evaluated before (T0), 1 month (T1), and 6 months (T2) after intestinal mobilization, recording Bristol stool scale scores, urinary p-cresol concentrations, and behavioral scores for social interaction deficits, stereotypic behaviors, anxiety, and hyperactivity. Gut mobilization yielded a progressive and highly significant decrease in all behavioral symptoms over the 6-month study period. Urinary p-cresol levels displayed variable trends not significantly correlated with changes in behavioral parameters, mainly increasing at T1 and decreasing at T2. These results support gut mobilization as a simple strategy to ameliorate ASD symptoms, as well as comorbid anxiety and hyperactivity, in chronically constipated children. Variation in p-cresol absorption seemingly provides limited contributions, if any, to these behavioral changes. Further research will be needed to address the relative role of reduced abdominal discomfort following mobilization, as compared to specific modifications in microbiome composition and in gut bacteria-derived neuroactive compounds.
34813034|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a group of neurodevelopmental-related disorders with a high genetic risk. Recently, chromatin remodeling factors have been found to be related to ASDs. SMARCA4 is such a catalytic subunit of the chromatin-remodeling complex. In this report, we identified seven novel missense variants in the SMARCA4 gene from eight pediatric patients. All eight patients had moderate to severe intellectual disability, and seven showed autistic/likely autistic features. Compared with the patients reported in the literature, our patients were less likely to show craniofacial or finger/toe anomalies. Our findings further supported that SMARCA4 is associated with ASDs. We suggest that individuals with the abovementioned phenotypes should consider genetic testing.
34813033|a|Despite showing effects in well-controlled studies, the extent to which early intensive behavioral intervention (EBI) produces positive changes in community-based settings remains uncertain. Thus, our study examined changes in autistic symptoms and adaptive functioning in 233 children with autism receiving EBI in a community setting. The results revealed nonlinear changes in adaptive functioning characterized by significant improvements during the intervention and a small linear decrease in autistic symptoms from baseline to follow-up. The intensity of intervention, initial age, IQ and autistic symptoms were associated either with progress during the intervention or maintenance during the follow-up. The next step to extend this line of research involves collecting detailed data about intervention strategies and implementation fidelity to produce concrete recommendations for practitioners.
34813032|a|Previous findings show executive functioning advantages associated with dual language learning (DLL) among neurotypical individuals, yet few studies have investigated these effects in youth with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The present study investigated effects of DLL and socioeconomic status (SES) on parent-reported executive functioning, verbal ability, and social-emotional functioning using a sample of DLL (n = 53) and monolingual (n = 106) youth with ASD without intellectual disability, matched on gender and full-scale IQ scores. After controlling for the effects of SES, results showed that monolingual youth had better outcomes on verbal ability, while DLL youth had fewer parent-reported problems with executive functioning and unusual behaviors. These findings indicate that bilingualism may mitigate executive functioning deficits in youth with ASD.
34812964|a|Youths' experiences in seeking and accessing help for mental health problems can have pervasive and lasting effects on personal and interpersonal functioning. In particular, youth who experience validating experiences presumably persevere in seeking help and generally have positive treatment outcomes, whereas youth who experience invalidation are also likely to experience, at least in the short term, ruptures in therapeutic relationships, shame, and reluctance to seek services. The goal of the current study was to expand on previous research assessing youths' interactions with mental health providers, allied professionals, family members, and peers, with a focus on subjective experiences of validation and invalidation. The current study investigated both validating and invalidating experiences in seeking, accessing, and maintaining professional services among 31 Canadian youth (n = 20 girls, n = 11 boys; 12 to 21 years old [M = 16.97, SD = 2.01]) who were diagnosed or self-identified with at least one of five conditions: depression (n = 26), anxiety (n = 22), eating disorders (n = 9), autism spectrum disorder (n = 2), or conduct disorder or oppositional defiant disorder (n = 2). Youth were recruited using convenience (e.g., posted advertisements in mental health clinics) and snowball sampling methods. Journey mapping methodology (i.e., participants created visual representations of milestones of their mental health journeys) was employed accompanied by semi-structured interviews to prompt youth to expand on their experiences (e.g., "Could you describe what was happening in your life when you first felt you would need support for your mental health?"). Four themes emerged using inductive thematic analysis, marked by the presence (validation) or lack (invalidation) of: feeling heard, feeling seen, feeling understood, and receiving helpful actions. Participants also reported key consequences of validation and invalidation. Findings broaden a conceptualization of validation across supportive relationships and an understanding of factors that enhance or impede the formation or maintenance of therapeutic relationships with youth. Clinical implications and limitations are discussed.
34812576|a|Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have altered sensory processing but may ineffectively communicate their experiences. Here, we used a battery of nociceptive behavioral tests to assess sensory alterations in two commonly used mouse models of ASD, BTBR T+ Itpr3tf /J (BTBR), and fragile-X mental retardation-1 knockout (Fmr1-KO) mice. We also asked whether emotional contagion, a primitive form of empathy, was altered in BTBR and Fmr1 KO mice when experiencing pain with a social partner. BTBR mice demonstrated mixed nociceptive responses with hyporesponsivity to mechanical/thermal stimuli and intraplantar injections of formalin and capsaicin while displaying hypersensitivity on the acetic acid test. Fmr1-KO mice were hyposensitive to mechanical stimuli and intraplantar injections of capsaicin and formalin. BTBR and Fmr1-KO mice developed significantly less mechanical allodynia following intraplantar injections of complete Freund's adjuvant, while BTBR mice developed slightly more thermal hyperalgesia. Finally, as measured by the formalin and acetic acid writhing tests, BTBR and Fmr1-KO mice did not show emotional contagion of pain. In sum, our findings indicate that depending on the sensation, pain responses may be mixed, which reflects findings in ASD individuals.
34812568|a|The behavior of offspring results from the combined expression of maternal and paternal genes. Genomic imprinting silences some genes in a parent-of-origin specific manner, a process that, among all animals, occurs only in mammals. How genomic imprinting affects the behavior of mammalian offspring, however, remains poorly understood. Here, we studied how the loss of the paternally inherited gene Magel2 in mouse pups affects the emission of separation-induced ultrasonic vocalizations (USV). Using quantitative analysis of more than 1000 USVs, we characterized the rate of vocalizations as well as their spectral features from postnatal days 6-12 (P6-P12), a critical phase of mouse development that covers the peak of vocal behavior in pups. Our analyses show that Magel2 deficient offspring emit separation-induced vocalizations at lower rates and with altered spectral features mainly at P8. We also show that dams display altered behavior towards their own Magel2 deficient offspring at this age. In a test to compare the retrieval of two pups, dams retrieve wildtype control pups first and faster than Magel2 deficient offspring. These results suggest that the loss of Magel2 impairs the expression of separation-induced vocalization in pups as well as maternal behavior at a specific age of postnatal development, both of which support the pups' growth and development.
34812142|a|Variants in the high confident autism spectrum disorder (ASD) gene ANK2 target both ubiquitously expressed 220 kDa ankyrin-B and neurospecific 440 kDa ankyrin-B (AnkB440) isoforms. Previous work showed that knock-in mice expressing an ASD-linked Ank2 variant yielding a truncated AnkB440 product exhibit ectopic brain connectivity and behavioral abnormalities. Expression of this variant or loss of AnkB440 caused axonal hyperbranching in vitro, which implicated AnkB440 microtubule bundling activity in suppressing collateral branch formation. Leveraging multiple mouse models, cellular assays, and live microscopy, we show that AnkB440 also modulates axon collateral branching stochastically by reducing the number of F-actin-rich branch initiation points. Additionally, we show that AnkB440 enables growth cone (GC) collapse in response to chemorepellent factor semaphorin 3 A (Sema 3 A) by stabilizing its receptor complex L1 cell adhesion molecule/neuropilin-1. ASD-linked ANK2 variants failed to rescue Sema 3A-induced GC collapse. We propose that impaired response to repellent cues due to AnkB440 deficits leads to axonal targeting and branch pruning defects and may contribute to the pathogenicity of ANK2 variants.
34811930|a|The core symptoms of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) mainly relate to social communication and interactions. ASD assessment involves expert observations in neutral settings, which introduces limitations and biases related to lack of objectivity and does not capture performance in real-world settings. To overcome these limitations, advances in technologies (e.g., virtual reality) and sensors (e.g., eye-tracking tools) have been used to create realistic simulated environments and track eye movements, enriching assessments with more objective data than can be obtained via traditional measures. This study aimed to distinguish between autistic and typically developing children using visual attention behaviors through an eye-tracking paradigm in a virtual environment as a measure of attunement to and extraction of socially relevant information. The 55 children participated. Autistic children presented a higher number of frames, both overall and per scenario, and showed higher visual preferences for adults over children, as well as specific preferences for adults' rather than children's faces on which looked more at bodies. A set of multivariate supervised machine learning models were developed using recursive feature selection to recognize ASD based on extracted eye gaze features. The models achieved up to 86% accuracy (sensitivity = 91%) in recognizing autistic children. Our results should be taken as preliminary due to the relatively small sample size and the lack of an external replication dataset. However, to our knowledge, this constitutes a first proof of concept in the combined use of virtual reality, eye-tracking tools, and machine learning for ASD recognition. LAY SUMMARY: Core symptoms in children with ASD involve social communication and interaction. ASD assessment includes expert observations in neutral settings, which show limitations and biases related to lack of objectivity and do not capture performance in real settings. To overcome these limitations, this work aimed to distinguish between autistic and typically developing children in visual attention behaviors through an eye-tracking paradigm in a virtual environment as a measure of attunement to, and extraction of, socially relevant information.
34811386|a|Psychological and mental health consequences of large-scale anti-contagion policies are assuming strong relevance in the COVID-19 pandemic. We proposed a specific focus on a large sample of children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), developing an ad hoc instrument to investigate changes occurred in specific (sub-)domains during a period of national lockdown (Italy). Our questionnaire, named AutiStress, is both context-specific (being set in the COVID-19 pandemic scenario) and condition-specific (being structured taking into account the autistic functioning peculiarities in the paediatric age). An age- and gender-matched group of neurotypical (TD) controls was also provided. As expected, the severe lockdown policies had a general negative impact both on ASD and TD children, reflecting the obvious burden of the pandemic situation. However, our findings also indicate that children with ASD experienced more positive changes than TD ones. Noteworthy, we report a thought-provoking double dissociation in the context-specific predictor (i.e., accessibility to private outdoor spaces), indicating that it impacts differently on the two groups. Focusing on the ASD group, results suggest a condition-specific impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on core autistic (sub-)domains. Taken together, our data call for a multi-layered, context- and condition-specific analysis of the pandemic burden beyond any oversimplification.
34810191|a|INTRODUCTION: Longitudinal trajectory methods, featuring outcome assessments at three or more time points, are increasingly being used as appropriate approaches to understand developmental pathways of people on the autism spectrum across the lifespan. Understanding the scope of this rapidly expanding body of research can help inform future trajectory studies and identify areas for potential meta-analysis as well as key evidence gaps. We present the protocol for a scoping review whose objective is to identify and summarise the scope of research that uses a longitudinal trajectory study design to examine development in children diagnosed with autism. Specifically, we will identify outcome domains and age intervals that have been well characterised, areas where further research is needed and the historical use of various longitudinal trajectory analytical approaches. METHODS AND ANALYSIS: We outline the methods for the proposed scoping review according to the framework outlined by Arksey and O'Malley, with subsequent clarifications and enhancements by other authors. Using a search strategy developed by a medical librarian, we will search six databases for relevant publications. Titles and abstracts will be screened in duplicate, followed by full-text screening. Data extraction fields developed predominantly a priori from a set of guiding subquestions will be used to chart relevant data. The findings will include quantitative aggregate summaries, narrative summaries, and appraisal of trajectory studies according to our methodological subquestions. We will consult autistic self-advocate and parent-caregiver stakeholders to facilitate interpretation of the findings. ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Research ethics approval is not required for this scoping review. The results will be presented to researcher, care professional, policy-maker and stakeholder audiences at local and international conferences, other dissemination activities and published in a peer-reviewed journal.
34810174|a|BACKGROUND: Antipsychotics are increasingly used among women of childbearing age and during pregnancy. OBJECTIVE: To determine whether children exposed to antipsychotics in utero are at increased risk of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or autism spectrum disorder (ASD), accounting for maternal diagnoses of bipolar, psychotic and other psychiatric disorders. Design Population-based cohort study, including a sibling analysis. Setting Nationwide data on all pregnant women and their live-born singletons in Denmark (1997-2017), Finland (1996-2016), Iceland (2004-2017), Norway (2004-2017), and Sweden (2006-2016). Participants 4 324 086 children were eligible for inclusion to the study cohort. Intervention Antipsychotic exposure in utero, assessed by pregnancy trimester, type of antipsychotic, and varying patterns of use. Main outcome measures Non-mutually exclusive diagnoses of ADHD and ASD. We used Cox proportional hazard models to calculate hazard ratios (HRs) controlling for maternal psychiatric disorders and other potential confounding factors. FINDINGS: Among 4 324 086 singleton births, 15 466 (0.4%) were exposed to antipsychotics in utero. During a median follow-up of 10 years, we identified 72 257 children with ADHD and 38 674 children with ASD. Unadjusted HRs were raised for both outcomes but shifted substantially towards the null after adjustment; 1.10 (95%CI 1.00 to 1.27) for ADHD and 1.12 (0.97 to 1.29) for ASD. Adjusted HRs remained consistent by trimester of exposure and type of antipsychotic. Comparing in utero exposure with pre-pregnancy use yielded HRs of 0.74 (0.62 to 0.87) for ADHD and 0.88 (0.70 to 1.10) for ASD. Sibling analyses yielded HRs of 1.14 (0.79 to 1.64) for ADHD and 1.34 (0.75 to 2.39) for ASD. DISCUSSION: Our findings suggest little or no increased risk of child ADHD or ASD after in utero exposure to antipsychotics. CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Results regarding child neurodevelopment are reassuring for women who need antipsychotics during pregnancy.
34809994|a|Exacerbation of symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) during COVID-19 or new onset of the OCD symptoms resulting from COVID-19 infection is an understudied area of research. It is possible that increased proinflammatory immune status is associated with the onset of obsessive-compulsive symptoms in patients with COVID-19 and that targeted anti-inflammatory treatments for COVID-19 infection can mitigate the new onset of Obsessive-Compulsive (OC) spectrum symptoms. In this review, we cover OCD pathogenesis as related to COVID-19, summarize the impact of cytokines on behavior, and suggest that anti-cytokine treatments can help mitigate post-COVID-19 and new onset of the OC symptoms.
34809685|a|BACKGROUND: Cornelia de Lange (CdLS), Fragile X (FXS) and Rubinstein-Taybi syndromes (RTS) evidence unique profiles of autistic characteristics. To delineate these profiles further, the development of early social cognitive abilities in children with CdLS, FXS and RTS was compared to that observed in typically developing (TD) and autistic (AUT) children. METHODS: Children with CdLS (N = 22), FXS (N = 19) and RTS (N = 18), completed the Early Social Cognition Scale (ESCogS). Extant data from AUT (N = 19) and TD (N = 86) children were used for comparison. RESULTS: Similar to AUT children, children with CdLS, FXS and RTS showed an overall delay in passing ESCogS tasks. Children with CdLS showed a similar degree of delay to AUT children and greater delay than children with FXS and RTS. The CdLS, FXS and RTS groups did not pass tasks in the same sequence observed in TD and AUT children. Children with CdLS (p = 0.04), FXS (p = 0.02) and RTS (p = 0.04) performed better on tasks requiring understanding simple intentions in others significantly more than tasks requiring joint attention skills. CONCLUSIONS: An underlying mechanism other than general cognitive delay may be disrupting early social cognitive development in children with CdLS, FXS and RTS. Factors that may disrupt early social cognitive development within these syndromes are discussed.
34809682|a|BACKGROUND: Children with autism have difficulties in understanding relationships, yet little is known about the levels of autistic traits with regard to peer relationships. This study examined the association between autistic traits and peer relationships. Additionally, we examined whether the expected negative association is more pronounced in children with a lower non-verbal IQ and in those who exhibit more externalizing problems. METHOD: Data were collected in a large prospective birth cohort of the Generation R Study (Rotterdam, the Netherlands) for which nearly 10,000 pregnant mothers were recruited between 2002 and 2006. Follow up data collection is still currently ongoing. Information on peer relationships was collected with PEERS application, an interactive computerized task (M = 7.8 years). Autistic traits were assessed among general primary school children by using the Social Responsiveness Scale (M = 6.1 years). Information was available for 1580 children. RESULT: Higher levels of autistic traits predicted lower peer acceptance and higher peer rejection. The interaction of autistic traits with externalizing problems (but not with non-verbal IQ or sex) was significant: only among children with low externalizing problems, a higher level of autistic traits predicted less peer acceptance and more peer rejection. Among children exhibiting high externalizing problems, a poor peer acceptance and high level of rejection is seen independently of the level of autistic traits. CONCLUSION: We conclude that autistic traits-including traits that do not classify as severe enough for a clinical diagnosis-as well as externalizing problems negatively impact young children's peer relationships. This suggests that children with these traits may benefit from careful monitoring and interventions focused at improving peer relationships.
34808574|a|This invited opinion article reviews current uses and controversies in vernacular and pharmacological cannabidiol use in pediatric neurologic disorders. Since the recent emergence of cannabidiol availability to the general public and recent Food and Drug Administration approval, it is important to highlight and expand understanding about CBD mechanism of action, long-term use, safety, and indications in children with neurological disorders.
34808292|a|Immune dysregulation has been found to be related to a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, investigations in very early childhood examining immunological abnormalities such as altered neonatal cytokine/chemokine profiles in association with an aberrant developmental trajectory, are sparse. We assessed neonatal blood spots from 398 children, including 171 with ASD, which were subdivided according to severity (121 severe, 50 mild/moderate) and cognitive/adaptive levels (144 low-functioning, 27 typical to high-functioning). The remainder were 69 children with developmental delay (DD), and 158 with typical development (TD), who served as controls in the Childhood Autism Risks from Genetics and the Environment (CHARGE) study. Exploratory analysis suggested that, in comparisons with TD and DD, CTACK (CCL27) and MPIF-1 (CCL23), respectively, were independently associated with ASD. Higher neonatal levels of CTACK were associated with decreased odds of ASD compared to TD (odds ratio [OR] = 0.40, 95% confidence interval [Cl] 0.21, 0.77), whereas higher levels of MPIF-1 were associated with increased odds of ASD (OR = 2.38, 95% Cl 1.42, 3.98) compared to DD but not to TD. MPIF-1 was positively associated with better scores in several developmental domains. Dysregulation of chemokine levels in early life can impede normal immune and neurobehavioral development, which can lead to diagnosis of ASD or DD. This study collectively suggests that certain peripheral chemokines at birth are associated with ASD progression during childhood and that children with ASD and DD have distinct neonatal chemokine profiles that can differentiate their diagnoses.
34808247|a|Unmyelinated fibers in the central nervous system are known to exist in hippocampal mossy fibers, cerebellar parallel fibers and striatal projection fibers. Previously, we and others reported diffuse distribution of Nav1.2, a voltage-gated sodium channel alpha-subunit encoded by the SCN2A gene, on unmyelinated striatal projection fibers. Mutations in the SCN2A gene are associated with epilepsies and autism. In this study, we investigated the distribution of Nav1.2 on the unmyelinated fibers in the corpus callosum and stria terminalis by immunohistochemistry and immunoelectron microscopy analysis, suggesting that diffuse localization of Nav1.2 on mid-axonal regions can be a useful marker for unmyelinated fibers.
34807644|a|INTRODUCTION: Pediatric integrated care is well-positioned to play a substantial role in crisis intervention; however, few studies have investigated the impact of these services. METHOD: We investigated differences in service utilization for youth experiencing a crisis in a large, predominantly rural health system by comparing outcomes for 171 youth who received a crisis evaluation in a primary care behavioral health (PCBH) setting to 171 youth presenting to the emergency department at the main hospital campus using a retrospective cohort study design. RESULTS: PCBH patients were less likely to be male, more likely to be diagnosed with an Adjustment Disorder and less likely to be diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder. Youth evaluated in PCBH were more likely to receive a psychiatric admission, had a shorter latency to the next BH appointment, and had higher rates of completing at least 1 visit in the year following the evaluation. A statistically nonsignificant reduction in frequency of psychiatric admission was observed in the year after the index date, with 3 integrated care patients (vs. 18 on index date) and 5 ED patients (vs. 6 on index date) admitted. DISCUSSION: Opportunities for future research on cost-effectiveness of care and continuous improvement aligned with quadruple aim outcomes are discussed. Overall, this study is among few others investigating the potential for pediatric integrated care models to contribute to youth suicide prevention and the study demonstrated promising increases in access and engagement with timely behavioral health care. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).
34807457|a|
34806989|a|BACKGROUND: A strong primary care system is vital to overall health. Research on the primary care of people with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has mostly focused on children. A synthesis of the existing literature related to the quality of primary care for the adult population with ASD would elucidate what is known about the topic as well as inform future research and clinical practice. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of our scoping review is to describe what is known about the quality of primary care for adults with ASD and identify knowledge gaps. METHODS: Prior to beginning the literature search, we reviewed literature related to defining both primary care and primary care quality to establish the context and concept of the research question. The search strategy was designed and executed by a research librarian. The MEDLINE, CINAHL, EMBASE, PsycINFO, and ProQuest Dissertations and Theses databases were searched for relevant literature. Grey literature will include relevant reports from government websites and associations with a focus on ASD. Two members of the research team will independently screen the academic and grey literature. Quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods study designs involving the quality of primary care services or patient-centered care for adults with ASD are eligible for inclusion in our scoping review. Studies that make it past the full-text review will undergo data extraction and quality appraisal by 2 independent reviewers. The data extraction results will be presented in a tabular format to clearly present what is known about the quality of primary care for adults with ASD; this table will be accompanied by a narrative synthesis. Literature selected for extraction will be coded for themes, which will form the basis of a thematic synthesis. The scoping review will follow the guidance proposed by the Joanna Briggs Institute. RESULTS: The search of electronic databases was conducted in October 2020, and it returned 2820 results. This research is still in progress. The results from our scoping review are expected to be available by fall 2021. CONCLUSIONS: The results from our scoping review will be useful for guiding future research on the quality of primary care for adults with ASD. INTERNATIONAL REGISTERED REPORT IDENTIFIER (IRRID): PRR1-10.2196/28196.
34806920|a|Neurodevelopmental disorders do not have biological markers that allow for their identification. This means that in most cases, diagnosis is based on behavior. This approach implies that difficulties will exist in establishing the diagnostic boundaries of the different nosological entities, and it argues that neurodevelopmental disorders probably share neuropsychological deficits. Our main objective was to study whether neurodevelopmental disorders share a common endophenotype. We carried out a study of memory in children with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD), Developmental Language Disorders (DLD), and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). For this purpose, we administered an extensive neuropsychological battery to evaluate memory to 24(ASD), 25(DLD), and 25(ADHD) children. The results obtained by these three clinical groups were contrasted with those obtained by a group of 25 children of typical development (TD). TD group performed better in all memory tasks, except the recognition task than the clinical groups, and the clinical groups showed slight differences among themselves in their performance in memory tasks. These results show that memory deficits could represent a common endophenotype at least in these three neurodevelopmental disorders and emphasize the need to intervene in memory disorders in this population.
34806428|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Previous research has highlighted the importance of mental health treatment for autistic youth. In that research base, most studies focus on demonstrating the efficacy of a particular intervention with a sample of autistic youth. However, understanding the characteristics of samples used within these studies (i.e. demographics) is an important avenue for expanding this research to a more diverse, representative sample of autistic youth in community settings. As such, the current review examined and characterized participants included within mental health treatment research. We coded studies for various demographics among the youth sample, caregivers, and providers participants. Results indicated that while efforts have been made to increase diversity in research, very few studies including transition-aged youth, those identifying as female, and/or those identifying as non-Caucasian. Clinically, a few studies included youth with lower cognitive abilities and/or those with specific mental health problems (e.g. trauma and depression) or more than one co-occurring mental health conditions. Overall, our results highlight several critical gaps in our current evidence base regarding mental health treatment for autistic youth, including the limited clinical representativeness of both provider and child participants.
34806181|a|Although neurotypical children often spend the majority of their time engaged in play activities, children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) can present with substantial delays in the development of play skills, requiring intensive intervention. Although targets for language and basic learning skills are often selected based on the development of neurotypical children (e.g., Sundberg, 2008), little research has been conducted on methods for selecting play skill targets. The current study compared acquisition of play skills that were development-matched (DM) and age-matched (AM) with 4 children diagnosed with ASD. Targets were selected based on the results of the Developmental Play Assessment (DPA; Lifter, 2008). No contrived prompts or consequences were used to teach play skills in either condition. Generalization was programmed for by teaching with 3 sets of toys in both conditions. All participants demonstrated acquisition of DM play targets and generalization to novel toys; none of the participants acquired AM play targets.
34806144|a|The prevalence of obesity among children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is higher than that among typically developing children and adolescents. However, very few studies have explored the genetic factors associated with obesity in children and adolescents with ASD. Thus, the aim of this study was to examine the associations between 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR) gene polymorphisms and obesity among children and adolescents with ASD. The study participants consisted of 33 children and adolescents with ASD and 271 age- and sex-matched typically developing controls. We compared the metabolic traits (body mass index, blood pressure, triglyceride, high-density lipoprotein, and fasting glucose levels) between the ASD and control group. Furthermore, we assessed the genotypes of rs12654264 in the HMGCR gene within the participants with ASD, and compared metabolic traits among the different allele subgroups. The mean body mass index (BMI) and triglyceride level of the ASD group were significantly higher than those of the control group. Within the ASD group, the triglyceride level of participants with rs12654264-T alleles was significantly higher than that of participants with A-alleles. A pattern of increasing values in the BMI and fasting glucose was also observed in participants with T allele. This is the first study to show that obesity in children and adolescents with ASD is associated with the cholesterol synthesis pathway. Future studies are needed to further clarify the molecular mechanisms by which the HMGCR gene influences metabolic traits.
34805976|a|The collection of expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) is an important resource to study complex traits through understanding where and how transcriptional regulations are controlled by genetic variations in the non-coding regions of the genome. Previous studies have focused on associating eQTLs with traits to identify the roles of trait-related eQTLs and their corresponding target genes involved in trait determination. Since most genes function as a part of pathways in a systematic manner, it is crucial to explore the pathways' involvements in complex traits to test potentially novel hypotheses and to reveal underlying mechanisms of disease pathogenesis. In this study, we expanded and applied loci2path software to perform large-scale eQTLs enrichment [i.e., eQTLs' target genes (eGenes) enrichment] analysis at pathway level to identify the tissue-specific enriched pathways within trait-related genomic intervals. By utilizing 13,791,909 eQTLs cataloged in the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) V8 data for 49 tissue types, 2,893 pathway sets reported from MSigDB, and query regions derived from the Phenotype-Genotype Integrator (PheGenI) catalog, we identified intriguing biological pathways that are likely to be involved in ten traits [Alzheimer's disease (AD), body mass index, Parkinson's disease (PD), schizophrenia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), stroke, blood pressure, autism spectrum disorder, and myocardial infarction]. Furthermore, we extracted the most significant pathways for AD, such as BioCarta D4-GDI pathway and WikiPathways sulfation biotransformation reaction and viral acute myocarditis pathways, to study specific genes within pathways. Our data presented new hypotheses in AD pathogenesis supported by previous studies, like the increased level of caspase-3 in the amygdala that cleaves GDP dissociation inhibitor and binds to beta-amyloid, leading to increased apoptosis and neuronal loss. Our findings also revealed potential pathogenesis mechanisms for PD, schizophrenia, NSCLC, blood pressure, autism spectrum disorder, and myocardial infarction, which were consistent with past studies. Our results indicated that loci2path's eQTLs enrichment test was valuable in unveiling novel biological mechanisms of complex traits. The discovered mechanisms of disease pathogenesis and traits require further in-depth analysis and experimental validation.
34805182|a|Truncating variants in specific exons of Fibrosin-like protein 1 (FBRSL1) were recently reported to cause a novel malformation and intellectual disability syndrome. The clinical spectrum includes microcephaly, facial dysmorphism, cleft palate, skin creases, skeletal anomalies and contractures, postnatal growth retardation, global developmental delay as well as respiratory problems, hearing impairment and heart defects. The function of FBRSL1 is largely unknown, but pathogenic variants in the FBRSL1 paralog Autism Susceptibility Candidate 2 (AUTS2) are causative for an intellectual disability syndrome with microcephaly (AUTS2 syndrome). Some patients with AUTS2 syndrome also show additional symptoms like heart defects and contractures overlapping with the phenotype presented by patients with FBRSL1 mutations. For AUTS2, a dual function, depending on different isoforms, was described and suggested for FBRSL1. Both, nuclear FBRSL1 and AUTS2 are components of the Polycomb subcomplexes PRC1.3 and PRC1.5. These complexes have essential roles in developmental processes, cellular differentiation and proliferation by regulating gene expression via histone modification. In addition, cytoplasmic AUTS2 controls neural development, neuronal migration and neurite extension by regulating the cytoskeleton. Here, we review recent data on FBRSL1 in respect to previously published data on AUTS2 to gain further insights into its molecular function, its role in development as well as its impact on human genetics.
34804653|a|Research problem Advances in technology have ensured its inevitable integration in our life. Children, being at a vulnerable age period of development, are spending more time on electronic devices. Some studies reported negative effects on sleep, physical health such as obesity and vision problems, and behavioral changes such as aggressive behavior with exposure to violent media content. Research significance We will study the effect of using electronic devices on communication skills in children in Saudi Arabia. Our findings can be used to raise awareness on this matter. Research objectives The aim of our study is to examine the association between screen time and social communication skills among children of four years to six years of age in Saudi Arabia. Research methodology A cross-sectional study was conducted to investigate the relationship between social skills development and screen time by using a validated Arabic version of the Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ). The sample in this study consists of 308 children from four to six years of age. Research results The results showed that the hours spent using the electronic device were significantly associated with having an SCQ score >= 15 (P < 0.05). A high SCQ score was prevalent in 19.7% (n = 31) of children who spent >3 hours using an electronic device compared to 10.2% (n = 5) and 7.84% (n = 8) of children who spent an hour or <2 hours using electronic devices, respectively. Conclusion Our study highlighted a significant association between the daily hours spent on devices and having an SCQ score above 15, which suggests a deficit in social skill development and having autism spectrum disorder-like symptoms.
34804569|a|Slowing the spread of COVID-19 requires people to actively change their lives by following protective practices, such as physical distancing and disinfecting their hands. Perceptions about the personal risk of COVID-19 may affect compliance with these practices. In this study, we assessed risk perception and optimism about COVID-19 in a multinational (UK, USA and Germany), longitudinal design during the early stages of the pandemic (16 March 2020; 1 April 2020; 20 May 2020). Our main findings are that (i) people showed a comparative optimism bias about getting infected and infecting others, but not for getting severe symptoms, (ii) this optimism bias did not change over time, (iii) optimism bias seemed to relate to perceived level of control over the action, (iv) risk perception was linked to publicly available information about the disorder, (v) people reported adhering closely to protective measures but these measures did not seem to be related to risk perception, and (vi) risk perception was related to questions about stress and anxiety. In additional cross-sectional samples, we replicated our most important findings. Our open and partly preregistered results provide detailed descriptions of risk perceptions and optimistic beliefs during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic in three Western countries.
34803822|a|Introduction: Burnout, inertia, meltdown, and shutdown (BIMS) have been identified as important parts of some autistic people's lives. This study builds on our previous work that offered early academic descriptions of these phenomena, based on the perspectives of autistic adults. Objectives: This study aimed to explore the unique knowledge and insights of eight autistic children and youth to extend and refine our earlier description of burnout, inertia, and meltdown, with additional exploration of shutdown. We also aimed to explore how these youth cope with these phenomena and what others around them do that make things better or worse, with a hope to glean knowledge to design better supports. Methods: One-to-one interviews were conducted with eight children and youth, who shared their experience with BIMS. To match individual communication strengths of children and youth, we took a flexible approach to interviews, allowing for augmentative communication systems and use of visual images to support verbal interviews, as needed. We conducted a reflexive, inductive thematic analysis, using an iterative process of coding, collating, reviewing, and mapping themes. Findings: Our analysis has identified that these youth describe BIMS as a multi-faceted experience involving emotional, cognitive and physical components. Moreover, these multifaceted experiences are often misunderstood by neurotypical adults, which contributes to inadequate support in managing BIMS. Of the four experiences, these youth identified meltdowns as most common. Conclusion: By gaining first-hand perspectives, we have identified novel insights into BIMS and developed a more holistic understanding of these phenomena. These youths' descriptions of supportive strategies for BIMS stress the importance of compassion and collaboration from trusted adults. This new knowledge will provide a foundation for how to better support autistic children and youth. Further research is required to develop an understanding of BIMS, especially with respect to how it is experienced by children and youth. Future research should leverage the insights and experiential knowledge of autistic children and youth to co-design support tool(s) for BIMS.
34803801|a|Children and adolescents with an intellectual disability (ID) and autistic traits often attend special needs schools where they are surrounded by peers with diverse characteristics. Given the role that peers can play in social development, we examined whether autistic traits development in students with ID and high levels of such characteristics are influenced by the level of autistic traits among the schoolmates they like most. Furthermore, we investigated the degree to which this peer influence susceptibility depends on students' gender. A longitudinal design, with data collection points at the beginning and the end of a school year, was used. Staff reported on 330 students with high levels of autistic traits (20.6% girls; age 10.17 years, SD = 3.74) who attended 142 classrooms in 16 Swiss special needs schools. Results showed that students' future individual level of autistic traits (T2) was not predicted by the autistic traits level of preferred peers (T1), controlling for individual autistic traits at T1, level of general functioning, gender, and age. However, the peer effect was significantly moderated by students' gender, indicating that girls but not boys were susceptible to peer influence. These findings are discussed in terms of implications for understanding autistic traits development and directions of support for children and adolescents in their peer context.
34803767|a|Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) is the most frequent cause of inherited intellectual disabilities and autism spectrum disorders, characterized by cognitive deficits and autistic behaviors. The silencing of the Fmr1 gene and consequent lack of FMRP protein, is the major contribution to FXS pathophysiology. FMRP is an RNA binding protein involved in the maturation and plasticity of synapses and its absence culminates in a range of morphological, synaptic and behavioral phenotypes. Currently, there are no approved medications for the treatment of FXS, with the approaches under study being fairly specific and unsatisfying in human trials. Here we propose peptides/peptidomimetics as candidates in the pharmacotherapy of FXS; in the last years this class of molecules has catalyzed the attention of pharmaceutical research, being highly selective and well-tolerated. Thanks to their ability to target protein-protein interactions (PPIs), they are already being tested for a wide range of diseases, including cancer, diabetes, inflammation, Alzheimer's disease, but this approach has never been applied to FXS. As FXS is at the forefront of efforts to develop new drugs and approaches, we discuss opportunities, challenges and potential issues of peptides/peptidomimetics in FXS drug design and development.
34803765|a|Background: The Social Motivation Hypothesis proposes that individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) experience social interactions as less rewarding than their neurotypical (TD) peers, which may lead to reduced social initiation. Existing studies of the brain's reward system in individuals with ASD report varied findings for anticipation of and response to social rewards. Given discrepant findings, the anticipation of and response to social rewards should be further evaluated, particularly in the context of intervention outcome. We hypothesized that individual characteristics may help predict neural changes from pre- to post-intervention. Methods: Thirteen adolescents with ASD received the Program for the Education and Enrichment of Relational Skills (PEERS) intervention for 16 weeks; reward-related EEG was collected before and after intervention. Fourteen TD adolescents were tested at two timepoints but did not receive intervention. Event-related potentials were calculated to measure anticipation of (stimulus-preceding negativity; SPN) and response to (reward-related positivity; RewP) social and non-social rewards. Additionally, measures of social responsiveness, social skills, and intervention-engagement were collected. Group differences were analyzed as well as individual differences using prediction models. Result: Parent-reported social responsiveness and social skills improved in adolescents with ASD after participation in PEERS. ASD adolescents displayed marginally decreased anticipation of social rewards at post-intervention compared to pre-intervention. Regression models demonstrated that older adolescents and those with lower parent-reported social motivation prior to participation in PEERS displayed marginally increased social reward anticipation (more robust SPN) from pre- to post-intervention. Participants who displayed more parent-reported social motivation before intervention and were more actively engaged in the PEERS intervention evidenced increased social reward processing (more robust RewP) from pre- to post-intervention. Conclusion: Findings suggest that there may be differences in saliency between wanting/anticipating social rewards vs. liking/responding to social rewards in individuals with ASD. Our findings support the hypothesis that identification of individual differences may predict which adolescents are poised to benefit the most from particular interventions. As such, reported findings set the stage for the advancement of "precision medicine." This investigation is a critical step forward in our ability to understand and predict individual response to interventions in individuals with ASD.
34803630|a|Restricted and repetitive behavior is a core symptom of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) characterized by features of restrictedness, repetition, rigidity, and invariance. Few studies have investigated how restrictedness is manifested in motor behavior. This study aimed to address this question by instructing participants to perform the utmost complex movement. Twenty children with ASD and 23 children with typical development (TD) performed one-dimensional, left-right arm oscillations by demonstrating varying amplitudes and frequencies. The entropy of amplitude and velocity was calculated as an index of kinematic complexity. Results showed that the velocity entropy, but not the amplitude entropy, was significantly lower in ASD than in TD (p < 0.01), suggesting restricted kinematics. Further analysis demonstrated that a significantly higher proportion of the velocity values was allocated at a low-speed level in the children with ASD (p < 0.01). A qualitative comparison of the complex movement with movement at preferred frequency suggested that the children with ASD might be less likely to shift away from the preferred movement. However, our study can be improved in terms of recruiting a larger sample of participants, measuring the level of motivation, and collecting both complex and preferred movements of the same participant.
34803605|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a set of complex neurodevelopmental diseases that include impaired social interaction, delayed and disordered language, repetitive or stereotypic behavior, restricted range of interests, and altered sensory processing. The underlying causes of the core symptoms remain unclear, as are the factors that trigger their onset. Given the complexity and heterogeneity of the clinical phenotypes, a constellation of genetic, epigenetic, environmental, and immunological factors may be involved. The lack of appropriate biomarkers for the evaluation of neurodevelopmental disorders makes it difficult to assess the contribution of early alterations in neurochemical processes and neuroanatomical and neurodevelopmental factors to ASD. Abnormalities in the cholinergic system in various regions of the brain and cerebellum are observed in ASD, and recently altered cholesterol metabolism has been implicated at the initial stages of the disease. Given the multiple effects of the neutral lipid cholesterol on the paradigm rapid ligand-gated ion channel, the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, we explore in this review the possibility that the dysregulation of nicotinic receptor-cholesterol crosstalk plays a role in some of the neurological alterations observed in ASD.
34803599|a|Neurodevelopmental diseases (NDDs), such as autism spectrum disorders, epilepsy, and schizophrenia, are characterized by diverse facets of neurological and psychiatric symptoms, differing in etiology, onset and severity. Such symptoms include mental delay, cognitive and language impairments, or restrictions to adaptive and social behavior. Nevertheless, all have in common that critical milestones of brain development are disrupted, leading to functional deficits of the central nervous system and clinical manifestation in child- or adulthood. To approach how the different development-associated neuropathologies can occur and which risk factors or critical processes are involved in provoking higher susceptibility for such diseases, a detailed understanding of the mechanisms underlying proper brain formation is required. NDDs rely on deficits in neuronal identity, proportion or function, whereby a defective development of the cerebral cortex, the seat of higher cognitive functions, is implicated in numerous disorders. Such deficits can be provoked by genetic and environmental factors during corticogenesis. Thereby, epigenetic mechanisms can act as an interface between external stimuli and the genome, since they are known to be responsive to external stimuli also in cortical neurons. In line with that, DNA methylation, histone modifications/variants, ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling, as well as regulatory non-coding RNAs regulate diverse aspects of neuronal development, and alterations in epigenomic marks have been associated with NDDs of varying phenotypes. Here, we provide an overview of essential steps of mammalian corticogenesis, and discuss the role of epigenetic mechanisms assumed to contribute to pathophysiological aspects of NDDs, when being disrupted.
34803276|a|The prevalence of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is close to 1% in the United States of America and other countries. Special attention should be given to oral health in individuals with ASD as they are often affected by oral diseases. However, gingival health in children with ASD and adolescents is controversial in terms of the severity of disease and number of people affected. Aim: To conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis to assess the gingival health status of children and adolescents with ASD. Methods: The search was conducted using eight databases for articles that met the inclusion and exclusion criteria. This search produced 742 relevant papers, but only five with sufficient data on gingival and plaque indices were eligible for inclusion in this systematic review and meta-analysis. Results: The homogeneity of the sample was tested using the Cohen Q test, which identified significant heterogeneity (P < 0.0001), indicating the use of the random effect's standard mean difference. Significantly higher gingival index and plaque index values were found in children and adolescents with ASD than in children without ASD. Conclusion: Individuals with ASD need help and better access to oral healthcare. Further investigation is needed with regard to gingival health in individuals with ASD and caries risk assessment to understand how this disorder affects oral health. A standardized index for gingival health will help in the inclusion of more studies to assess gingival health in children and adolescents with ASD.
34802987|a|BACKGROUND: Controversy exists regarding the DSM-5 criteria for autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Given the mixed results that have been reported, our main aim was to determine DSM-5 sensitivity and specificity in a child and adolescent Spanish sample. As secondary goals, we assessed the diagnostic stability of DSM-IV-TR in DSM-5, and clinical differences between children diagnosed with an ASD or a social (pragmatic) communication disorder (SPCD). METHODS: This study was carried out in 2017, reviewing the medical records of patients evaluated in our service. Items from a parent report measure of ASD symptoms (Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised) were matched to DSM-5 criteria and used to assess the sensitivity and specificity of the DSM-5 criteria and current DSM-IV criteria when compared with clinical diagnoses. RESULTS: DSM-5 sensitivity ranged from .69 to 1.00, and was higher in females. By age, the DSM-5 and DSM-IV-TR criteria showed similar sensitivity. In the case of intellectual quotient, DSM-5 criteria sensitivity was lower for those in the "low-functioning" category. DSM-5 specificity ranged from .64 to .73, while DSM-5 specificity was similar for all phenotypic subgroups. With respect to stability, 83.3% of autism disorder cases retained a diagnosis of ASD using the DSM-5 criteria. With regard to differences between ASD and SPCD, we found that patients diagnosed with ASD received more pharmacological treatment than those diagnosed with SPCD. CONCLUSIONS: Further research is required to confirm our results. Studies focusing on the SPCD phenotype will be necessary to determine outcome differences with ASD and the most effective diagnostic and therapeutic tools.
34802470|a|BACKGROUND: Autism Spectrum disorder (ASD) has uniquely stigmatizing aspects because children with ASD have no physical markers of their condition. Parents are usually blamed and judgment from others is often internalized (felt stigma). AIM: This study was conducted to determine knowledge about ASD, negative experiences (enacted stigma), internalization of stigma (felt or self stigma) and its correlates among parents of children with ASD in Lagos, Nigeria. METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study of 230 parents in Lagos, Nigeria employing mixed-method data collection methods. Quantitative data were collected using a structured interviewer-administered questionnaire and analyzed with Epi- Info  version 7.0 statistical package. Data were summarized with proportions, mean and standard deviation. Chi square and Spearman's correlation tests were done, and the level of significance was pre-determined at 5% (p < 0.05). In-depth interviews were also conducted among six parents to further explore the topic. The interviews were analyzed narratively. RESULTS: The proportion of mothers and fathers were 175 (76.1%) and 55 (23.9%) respectively. The mean age of respondents was 42 +- 8.5 years. Overall knowledge of ASD was very poor as only 3(1.3%) had good knowledge. Overall, 122(53%) usually had negative experience of parenting a child with ASD (enacted stigma), mothers (17.1%) more than fathers (9.1%). Majority 192(83.5%) internalized stigma. There was a low-moderate correlation between 'enacted' stigma and 'internalized' stigma (rho- 0.400, p < 0.001). From in-depth interviews, many parents revealed that their child's condition had negative effects on the family. Many also recounted negative experience of stigma. CONCLUSION: Overall, parents of children with ASD had poor knowledge of the condition. Majority internalized stigma and this increases with negative treatment from others. Parents should be properly educated about ASD. Community-based education to increase awareness about ASD in addition to encouraging people to show empathy and reduce stigmatizing behaviour towards parents of children with ASD are recommended.
34802461|a|BACKGROUND: In recent years, several hundred autism spectrum disorder (ASD) implicated genes have been discovered impacting a wide range of molecular pathways. However, the molecular underpinning of ASD, particularly from the point of view of 'brain to behaviour' pathogenic mechanisms, remains largely unknown. METHODS: We undertook a study to investigate patterns of spatiotemporal and cell type expression of ASD-implicated genes by integrating large-scale brain single-cell transcriptomes (> million cells) and de novo loss-of-function (LOF) ASD variants (impacting 852 genes from 40,122 cases). RESULTS: We identified multiple single-cell clusters from three distinct developmental human brain regions (anterior cingulate cortex, middle temporal gyrus and primary visual cortex) that evidenced high evolutionary constraint through enrichment for brain critical exons and high pLI genes. These clusters also showed significant enrichment with ASD loss-of-function variant genes (p < 5.23 x 10-11) that are transcriptionally highly active in prenatal brain regions (visual cortex and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex). Mapping ASD de novo LOF variant genes into large-scale human and mouse brain single-cell transcriptome analysis demonstrate enrichment of such genes into neuronal subtypes and are also enriched for subtype of non-neuronal glial cell types (astrocyte, p < 6.40 x 10-11, oligodendrocyte, p < 1.31 x 10-09). CONCLUSION: Among the ASD genes enriched with pathogenic de novo LOF variants (i.e. KANK1, PLXNB1), a subgroup has restricted transcriptional regulation in non-neuronal cell types that are evolutionarily conserved. This association strongly suggests the involvement of subtype of non-neuronal glial cells in the pathogenesis of ASD and the need to explore other biological pathways for this disorder.
34802066|a|This Taiwan study examined the associations of parental age and mental disorders with the offspring risks of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), major depressive disorder (MDD), and bipolar disorder (BD). Children born between January 1991 and December 2004 in Taiwan were enrolled as the birth cohort (n = 4,138,151) and followed up until December 2011. A logistic regression analysis was performed to identify the odds ratio (OR). The advanced age effects were significant in ADHD (range of OR: 1.04 to 1.49) and ASD (range of OR: 1.35 to 2.27). Teenage mothers, teenage fathers, and fathers >= 50 years had higher offspring risks of MDD (range of OR: 1.24 to 1.46); and teenage mothers and fathers >= 50 years had increased offspring risks of BD (range of OR: 1.23 to 1.87). Both paternal and maternal mental disorders were associated with higher risks of within-disorder transmission for ADHD, ASD, MDD, and BD (range of OR: 2.64 to 30.41). Besides, parents with one of these four mental disorders (ADHD, ASD, MDD, and BD) might have higher risk of cross-disorder transmission to at least one of the other three mental disorders in the offspring (range of OR: 1.35 to 7.15). Parental age and mental disorders had complex and nuanced patterns in association with offspring mental disorders.
34801733|a|INTRODUCTION: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complex, behaviorally defined disorder of the immature brain as a result of genetic and environmental risk factors, such as prenatal exposure to valproic acid (VPA). This syndrome is known for its high prevalence. On the other hand, postnatal manipulations have been shown to affect brain development, cortical neuroscience, and pituitary-adrenal activity. In early handling (EH) procedure, pups are removed from their mother on a daily basis from birth to lactation, are physically touched, and exposed to the (a) new environment. In the present study, the effect of EH on anxiety-like behaviors in rats exposed pre- and post-natally to valproic acid was investigated. METHODS: Pregnant Wistar rats were randomly separated into six groups which are prenatal saline, Prenatal VPA, Prenatal VPA + EH and postnatal saline, Postnatal VPA, Postnatal VPA + EH. VPA administration was performed either on ED12.5 (600 mg/kg, i.p.) or PD 2-4 (400 mg/kg, s.c.). In the groups receiving EH, pups underwent physical handling from PD 1 to 21. On postnatal day 21 all offspring were weaned and the behavioral tests were performed on 30 and 31 days of age. Elevated plus maze and open field tests were used to investigate anxiety-like behaviors. RESULTS: The results revealed that intraperitoneal injection of valrpoic acid (600 mg.kg) during pregnancy significantly reduced OAT% in males (p < 0.01) and females in a non-significant manner (p > 0.05). In comparison, rearing counts of prenatal VPA groups significantly increased in female sex (p < 0.05) in the EPM test. Following postnatal VPA administration (400 mg/kg), decrease in the time spent in central zone occurred in female rats in the open filed (p < 0.05), as well as a significant increase in the number of grooming of the male sex (p < 0.05). Applying Early Handling to male and female Wistar rats receiving prenatal VPA significantly reversed the OAT% fall (p < 0.05). EH in postnatally VPA exposed animals significantly decreased the OAT% and OAE% criteria, while increasing the locomotor activity of the female sex (p < 0.05). Compared with the postnatal VPA group, no significant change was reported in the EPM performance of postnatal VPA + EH group in neither of sexes (p > 0.05). CONCLUSION: The findings of this study suggest that injections of valproic acid during pregnancy lead to anxiety-like behaviors in male offspring, which EH can improve (attenuate) to some extent. VPA injections on the second to the fourth day of infancy did not have a profound effect on anxiety level. Further behavioral studies need to be performed using other devices to investigate anxiety-like behaviors and to determine the mechanisms involved in these behaviors.
34801018|a|BACKGROUND: Lack of physicians' knowledge regarding mental health, including Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) could have adverse effects on affected individuals' health and quality of life. The purpose of this study was to provide construct validity for a modified questionnaire in order to determine the self-reported competency for underlying sub-constructs in ASD, make inferences on perceived competence in ASD based on a sample of Romanian physicians, and identify physicians' characteristics associated with these sub-domains of competency. METHODS: For this survey, we modified a questionnaire that was used in Pakistan and Turkey, and administered it to a sample of 383 practicing physicians in Romania to assess their perceived competency regarding ASD. Exploratory factor analysis on 12 knowledge questions revealed five sub-domains: stigma, potential causes, children's behavior, misconceptions, and educational needs associated with ASD knowledge. Using General Linear Models, we determined physicians' characteristics that predict the total competency score and various competency sub-scores. RESULTS: Seventy-five percent of the responding physicians were female and 30% had over 30 years practicing medicine. The majority (73-94%) of physicians have correctly responded to some basic questions regarding knowledge about ASD. We also found that younger physicians were more knowledgeable about potential causes of ASD than older physicians (Adjusted Mean Score (AMS): 2.90 vs. 2.18, P < 0.01), while older physicians knew more about the behavior of children with ASD (AMS: 0.64 vs. 0.37, P = 0.02). We found a significant interaction (P < 0.01) between television as source of ASD knowledge and city where the clinic is located in relation to knowledge of the physicians regarding stigma related to ASD. However, the total score was not associated with the variables associated with sub-domains. CONCLUSION: Using factor analysis, we demonstrated construct validity of five sub-domains related to Romanian physicians' knowledge about ASD that include stigma, potential causes, behavior in ASD children, special education needs, and misconceptions related to ASD. The lack of significant association of the knowledge of physicians on ASD neither with the Psychiatry nor the Pediatric ward rotations at medical school may support the need for improving the curriculum on ASD in Romanian medical schools.
34800812|a|BACKGROUND: Developmental Language Disorder (DLD) is one of the most prevalent developmental disorders and affects expressive and receptive language with no clear cause (Bishop et al., 2017). Awareness of DLD is currently much lower than other (sometimes less prevalent) disorders such as Autism or Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) (Bishop, 2010). Despite this, it has now been established that the implications of DLD reach well into adulthood (Botting, 2020; Botting et al., 2016; Clegg et al., 2005; Johnson et al., 2010). Thus, DLD may affect not only school progress but also employment. Whilst recent research indicates that the rate of employment in this group was similar to peers (Conti-Ramsden et al., 2018), it also reported lower levels of employment in terms of hours, contracts and employment type. However, there is virtually no research examining why this might be the case. In contrast there is already a growing evidence base surrounding Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and Dyslexia in the workplace. Systematic reviews of factors affecting employment in ASD and Dyslexia (de Beer et al., 2014; Scott et al., 2019) have revealed barriers including the job application process itself. AIMS & METHODS: In this study we aimed to explore managers' awareness of DLD and their views on training, adjustments and feasibility when considering employing an individual with DLD. Specifically, we asked: 1) What awareness do managers have of DLD and how does this compare to awareness of ASD and other developmental disorders? 2) What is the extent of training on DLD and other developmental disorders in the workplace? 3) What barriers to employment are perceived to be most significant by managers? 4) What strategies do managers report as currently in place to help support people with DLD? 5) What are perceived strengths of people with DLD according to managers? RESULTS: In total, 77 managers completed an anonymous online survey which was accessed via a social media link. Managers came from a wide variety of backgrounds with an equal split between public and private organisations, and across gender. The number of managers who had heard of DLD was lower than for the other disorders (ADHD, ASD, Dyslexia). This pattern was partly mirrored in the proportion of managers who felt they had received adequate training on communication difficulties. However, training on developmental disorders generally was reported as very scarce. A qualitative examination of barriers identified by managers included interviewing and CV submission, reading and following instructions, lack of clear guidelines around support needed, and financial restrictions in providing support. CONCLUSIONS: These findings support existing literature and have implications for policy and practice - namely that young people with DLD may need to be proactive about disclosing their language needs, and that workplaces need increased basic training in DLD.
34800434|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD), a neurodevelopmental disorder, is featured by impaired social communication and restricted and repetitive behaviors and interests. ASD and comorbid neurodevelopmental disorders (ASD-NDDs), especially epilepsy and intellectual disability (ID)/global developmental delay (GDD) are frequently presented in genetic disorders. The aim of this study was to explore the clinical and genetic profile of ASD in combination with epilepsy or ID/GDD. METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the clinical characteristics, and genetic spectrum of pediatric patients presenting ASD-NDDs with proven genetic etiology. The pathogenicity of variants was conducted by molecular geneticists and clinicians complied with the guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG). RESULTS: Among 154 patients with ASD-NDDs, 79 (51.3%) patients gained a genetic diagnosis. Most patients (78/79, 98.7%) had comorbid ID or GDD, and 49 (49/79, 62.0%) had comorbid epilepsy. The clinical characteristics of those 79 patients were varied. 87 genetic variants were found among the 79 pedigrees. Most of the involved genes have roles in gene expression regulation (GER) and neuronal communication (NC). Most genes have been proven to be ASD-related genes, and some of them were not reported to contribute to ASD previously. CONCLUSION: We summarized the genetic and clinical profile of 79 ASD-NDDs patients with proven genetic etiology. The genetic spectrum of ASD was expanded, and we highlighted a novel possible ASD candidate gene PRTG.
34800316|a|Movement is prospective. It structures self-generated engagement with objects and social partners and is fundamental to children's learning and development. In autistic children, previous reports of differences in movement kinematics compared to neurotypical peers suggest that its prospective organisation might be disrupted. Here, we employed a smart tablet serious game paradigm to assess differences in the feedforward and feedback mechanisms of prospective action organisation, between autistic and neurotypical preschool children. We analysed 3926 goal-directed finger movements made during smart-tablet ecological gameplay, from 28 children with Childhood Autism (ICD-10; ASD) and 43 neurotypical children (TD), aged 3-6 years old. Using linear and generalised linear mixed-effect models, we found the ASD group executed movements with longer movement time (MT) and time to peak velocity (TTPV), lower peak velocity (PV), with PV less likely to occur in the first movement unit (MU) and with a greater number of movement units after peak velocity (MU-APV). Interestingly, compared to the TD group, the ASD group showed smaller increases in PV, TTPV and MT with an increase in age (ASD x age interaction), together with a smaller reduction in MU-APV and an increase in MU-APV at shorter target distances (ASD x Dist interaction). Our results are the first to highlight different developmental trends in anticipatory feedforward and compensatory feedback mechanisms of control, contributing to differences in movement kinematics observed between autistic and neurotypical children. These findings point to differences in integration of prospective perceptuomotor information, with implications for embodied cognition and learning from self-generated action in autism.
34800229|a|The present study aimed at enhancing the assessment of adaptive behavior in adolescents with Autism Spectrum Disorder trough the Adaptive Behavior Assessment System-Second Edition. To overcome the limits underpinning floor effect, which are commonly observed with the traditional methods, the statistical Hessl method and its revision by Orsini, Pezzuti and Hulbert was adopted. The results showed a more variation using the former method compared to the latter: a greater impairment in Social versus Leisure skills emerged. Regarding the Conceptual domain, a greater deficit in Functional Academics was observed. In the Practical domain, we found a greater impairment in Self-Care skills. Conversely, Home Living skills appeared as a strength compared to other skills. The results are discussed in reference to literature.
34800228|a|Families of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) often utilize a variety of services. Relatively few studies have examined the relationship between family empowerment and service utilization for this population. The present study investigated the relationship between family empowerment and service utilization in families of children with ASD from the Pacific Northwest. Family empowerment did not predict the use of behavioral services or established related services. However, higher family empowerment was reported for families who reported use of complementary and alternative medicine. Implications for future research and clinical practice are discussed.
34800227|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a serious neurodevelopmental disorder with no clinical biomarker. This study used untargeted metabolomic analysis to identify metabolic characteristics in plasma that can distinguish ASD children. 29 boys with ASD (3.02 +- 0.67 years) and 30 typically developing (TD) boys (3.13 +- 0.46 years) were recruited. Developmental and behavioral assessments were conducted in ASD group. Samples of plasma were analyzed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The association between metabolite concentration and scale score was assessed by Spearman rank correlation. Altered metabolic characteristics were found in boys with ASD. In Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis, ornithine had the highest AUC (Area under ROC) value. Furthermore, the concentration of choline and ornithine was negatively correlated with ABC-language score in ASD group.
34800226|a|Participation has become an important measure of outcome in child rehabilitation as young children with developmental disabilities are increasingly at risk of decreased participation. Therefore, this study garnered information on clinicians' perspectives regarding perceived facilitators and barriers when rendering participation-based interventions using a qualitative research design. Semi-structured interviews of clinicians (Ns = 12, 25-57 years) were conducted and evaluated via an inductive thematic analysis. Results denote that current mechanisms of providing participation-based interventions resembled traditionally focused interventions; thus, resulting in a knowledge-to-practice gap. Clinicians desired more opportunities to communicate with caregivers and to be able to influence the children' s natural environments. They also identified shortness of time, resources, and rigid health care regulations as barriers hampering the efficacy of participation-based services.
34800004|a|Assessing improvements in social communication behaviors in minimally verbal children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is often challenging. The Clinical Global Impression Scale (CGI) is a 7-point scale that has been adapted so that clinicians can easily and quickly rate social communication behaviors. The current study evaluated the CGI-Improvement (CGI-I) subscale as a measure of social communication change in minimally verbal children with ASD. The sample included 54 minimally verbal school-age children with ASD enrolled in a social communication intervention trial. CGIs were rated by interventionists and the study coordinator at baseline and at Week 6 of intervention, and were compared to scores on the Communication Complexity Scale (CCS). Results indicated that CGI ratings corresponded with CCS scores at baseline and Week 6. Children who were rated as more severe on social communication at baseline demonstrated lower complexity of communication compared to those who were rated as less severe. Those who demonstrated fast response to intervention at Week 6 showed greater improvement in their joint attention than those who were slower responders. These results provide support for the utility and validity of the CGI-I as a measure of social communication change in minimally verbal children. This study tested the CGI, a clinician rating scale, with a group of children with ASD with limited language who received intervention to improve social interactions and communication. Children's CGI ratings were comparable to other assessments in measuring social communication. The CGI may be a useful tool for those interested in quickly and easily tracking changes in children's social communication over the course of treatment. LAY SUMMARY: This study tested the Clinical Global Impression (CGI), a clinician rating scale, with a group of children with ASD with limited language who received intervention to improve social interactions and communication. Children's CGI ratings were comparable to other assessments in measuring social communication. The CGI may be a useful tool for those interested in quickly and easily tracking changes in children's social communication over the course of treatment.
34799999|a|Early intensive behavioral interventions (EIBI) for children at elevated likelihood for a later diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (EL-ASD), are often delivered through parent-mediated models. An area of current exploration is whether changes in caregiver behaviors are a mechanism through which to improve and track child behaviors in these interventions. Toddlers and their caregivers participated in an intervention trial (randomized controlled trial) and were randomized to either a parent-mediated intervention (adapted responsive teaching; ART) or a control condition (referral to early intervention and monitoring; REIM). Changes in toddler social communication (SC) behaviors and characteristics of caregiver responsiveness (CR) were quantified over 8 months. Analyses were conducted to assess whether changes in CR mediated the relation between group (ART vs. REIM) and changes in child SC. Results of the current study indicated that caregivers who participated in a parent-mediated intervention improved in three domains of CR (contingent verbal sensitivity, responsivity, affect). CR was also found to be a mechanism through which children's SC skills improved. This work provides evidence that qualities of CR serve as mechanisms through which to improve and monitor child behaviors over the course of EIBIs. These results may lead to novel intervention targets, methods for tracking change, and tailored treatment planning for toddlers with EL-ASD. The data used in this study comes from a clinical trial that was prospectively registered with the Registry of Efficacy and Effectiveness Studies (Registry ID: 316.1v1).
34799840|a|Data about the neurological prognosis of isolated cerebellar hypoplasia in utero are scant and inconsistent. In this monocentric retrospective study, we describe the neurodevelopmental outcomes in a series of children with isolated cerebellar hypoplasia of presumably hemorrhagic origin prenatally detected with fetal magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). We retrospectively reviewed the charts of all the pregnant women who were referred for a neurological consultation, diagnosed with fetal encephalic malformation/disruption between 2010 and 2020 in the Fetal Therapy Unit of our institution. Fetal MRI (fMRI) was performed in all the pregnancies. Fetuses with cerebellar hypoplasia presumably of hemorrhagic origin were selected for the study. Fetuses exposed to alcohol or with additional malformations in other cerebral or body areas were excluded. All the infants received the postpartum follow-up care adopted in our center, including post-natal MRI, serial neurological examinations, standardized neurodevelopmental tests, and regular parental interviews. Cognitive functions were tested with GRIFFITHS II, WPPSI-III, and WISC-IV according to the child's age. A total of 14 pregnant women out of 479 fetal consultations were eligible and included in the study group. In 57% of cases, the etiology of the hemorrhage was unknown. In 21% of cases, it was attributed to a blood transfusion, while in the remaining ones, it was attributed to maternal predisposing factors. Among the survivors, two infants were excluded for prematurity, and two were lost to follow-up. Ten patients were thus included in the study. Six patients had normal neurodevelopment and cognition, and three presented mild-moderate neurological signs, i.e., mild dyspraxia and visuoperceptual impairment. Only one child had a severe outcome, i.e., autism spectrum disorder. The cerebellum is particularly vulnerable to disruptions throughout its prolonged development. Extreme caution must be used in prenatal counseling considering that in the acute phase, lesion extension and vermis involvement can be overestimated with fMRI. In cases of uncertainty, performing an additional fMRI could be advisable after 4-8 weeks. However, in our series, infants with isolated cerebellar hypoplasia tended to have a favorable prognosis. Nevertheless, a long-term follow-up is needed and should include a postnatal brain MRI, serial neurological examinations, and neurodevelopmental tests at least up to school age.
34799787|a|Social media can lead to rejection, cyber-bullying victimisation, and cyber-aggression, and these experiences are not fully understood as experienced by autistic adults. To investigate this, 78 autistic adults completed self-report measures of social media use, cyber-bullying victimisation, cyber-aggression, and self-esteem. High levels of social media use were found to be associated with an increased risk of cyber-victimisation; whereas self-esteem was positively correlated with feelings of belonging to an online community and negatively correlated with feelings of being ignored on social network sites and chat rooms. Future studies are needed to further investigate the experience of cyber-bullying victimisation of autistic adults.
34799348|a|
34798485|a|BACKGROUND: Recent research has shown a growing interest in exploring the relationship between anorexia nervosa (AN) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Both conditions seem to share areas of cognitive, social and behavioural impairment, leading to relevant implications on treatment, especially when they are in comorbidity. This literature review aims to synthesise the latest studies on this topic to investigate the co-occurrence of AN and ASD, suggest future research directions and consider implications for treatment. METHOD: Records were systematically (PRISMA guidelines) identified through PubMed, EBSCOhost, Scopus and Web of Science searching. RESULTS: Thirteen studies met the eligibility criteria and were therefore included in the review. Results seem to confirm an overrepresentation of ASD symptoms in AN. Only few studies investigated the AN-ASD comorbidity in young people and report slightly lower rates than those conducted with adults. CONCLUSIONS: Analysed studies suggest that while the comorbidity seems to exacerbate the severity of the condition, autistic traits appear to be rather stable over time and not related to body weight. Thus, future longitudinal studies and gender- specific assessment tools can help clarify the relationship between the two disorders, examine the onset of ASD symptoms and develop structured guidelines for treatment.
34798480|a|BACKGROUND: Relationship of perceived stigma and barrier to service access among Latino populations with autism in cross-cultural settings has not been fully explored. AIM: The present study explored the relationship between difficulty accessing services and perceived stigma among caregivers of autistic children in Latin America. Additionally, explore contextual factors that better explain the perception of stigma when accessing services. METHODS AND PROCEDURE: Approximately 2500 caregivers from six Latin American countries completed an online survey. Descriptive inferential analysis and a pointbiserial correlation were conducted to understand direct relationship between difficulty accessing services and perceived stigma and to test their relationship. Added contextual factors contributing to this relationship were examined through a binary logistic regression. OUTCOMES AND RESULTS: Barriers to accessing services predicted stigma. Contextual factors such as country of residence, frustration experienced by caregivers, gender of autistic child and challenging behaviours had higher odds of experiencing some form of perceived stigma. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: These results suggest experiences with stigma to be heavily influenced by environmental factors such cultural differences which in combination with contextual factors could further increase the likelihood of perceiving stigma. When observing stigma within a social-cognitive approach, it is possible that a strong-held adherence to cultural norms, in addition to negative experiences (e.g., frustration) when accessing services, could be influencing caregivers perceived stigma.
34798202|a|BACKGROUND: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) usually present overlapping symptoms. Abnormal white matter (WM) microstructure has been found in these disorders. Identification of common and unique neural abnormalities across NDDs could provide further insight into the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. METHODS: We performed a voxel-based meta-analysis of whole-brain diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) studies in autism spectrum disorder (ASD), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and other NDDs. A systematic literature search was conducted through March 2020 to identify studies that compared measures of WM microstructure between patients with NDDs and neurotypical controls. Peak voxel coordinates were meta-analyzed via anisotropic effect size-signed differential mapping (AES-SDM) as well as activation likelihood estimation (ALE). RESULTS: Our final sample included a total of 4137 subjects from 66 studies across five NDDs. Fractional anisotropy (FA) reductions were found in the splenium of the CC in ADHD, and the genu and splenium of CC in ASD. And mean diffusivity (MD) increases were shown in posterior thalamic radiation in ASD. No consistent abnormalities were detected in specific learning disorder, motor disorder or communication disorder. Significant differences between child/adolescent and adult patients were found within the CC across NDDs, reflective of aberrant neurodevelopmental processes in NDDs. CONCLUSIONS: The current study demonstrated atypical WM patterns in ASD, ADHD and other NDDs. Microstructural abnormalities in the splenium of the CC were possibly shared among ASD and ADHD.
34797853|a|Neurodevelopmental disorders such as epilepsy and autism have been linked to an imbalance of excitation and inhibition (E/I) in the central nervous system. The simplicity and tractability of C. elegans allows our electroconvulsive seizure (ES) assay to be used as a behavioral readout of the locomotor circuit and neuronal function. C. elegans possess conserved nervous system features such as gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and GABA receptors in inhibitory neurotransmission, and acetylcholine (Ach) and acetylcholine receptors in excitatory neurotransmission. Our previously published data has shown that decreasing inhibition in the motor circuit, via GABAergic manipulation, will extend the time of locomotor recovery following electroshock. Similarly, mutations in a HECT E3 ubiquitin ligase called EEL-1 leads to impaired GABAergic transmission, E/I imbalance and altered sensitivity to electroshock. Mutations in the human ortholog of EEL-1, called HUWE1, are associated with both syndromic and non-syndromic intellectual disability. Both EEL-1 and its previously established binding protein, OGT-1, are expressed in GABAergic motor neurons, localize to GABAergic presynaptic terminals, and function in parallel to regulate GABA neuron function. In this study, we tested behavioral responses to electroshock in wildtype, ogt-1, eel-1 and ogt-1; eel-1 double mutants. Both ogt-1 and eel-1 null mutants have decreased inhibitory GABAergic neuron function and increased electroshock sensitivity. Consistent with EEL-1 and OGT-1 functioning in parallel pathways, ogt-1; eel-1 double mutants showed enhanced electroshock susceptibility. Expression of OGT-1 in the C. elegans nervous system rescued enhanced electroshock defects in ogt-1; eel-1 double mutants. Application of a GABA agonist, Baclofen, decreased electroshock susceptibility in all animals. Our C. elegans electroconvulsive seizure assay was the first to model a human X-linked Intellectual Disability (XLID) associated with epilepsy and suggests a potential novel role for the OGT-1/EEL-1 complex in seizure susceptibility.
34797523|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a disease characterized by reduced social interaction and stereotypic behaviors and related to macroscopic volumetric changes in cerebellar and somatosensory cortices (SPP). Epidemiological and preclinical models have confirmed that a proinflammatory profile during fetal development increases ASD susceptibility after birth. Here, we aimed to globally identify the effect of maternal exposure to high-energy dense diets, which we refer to as cafeteria diet (CAF) on peripheral and central proinflammatory profiles, microglia reactivity, and volumetric brain changes related to assisting defective social interaction in the mice offspring. We found a sex-dependent effect of maternal exposure to CAF diet or inoculation of the dsARN mimetic Poly (I:C) on peripheral proinflammatory and social interaction in the offspring. Notably, maternal exposure to CAF diet impairs social interaction and favors an increase in anxiety in male but not female offspring. Also, CAF diet exposure or Poly (I:C) inoculation during fetal programming promote peripheral proinflammatory profile in the ASD-diagnosed male but not in females. Selectively, we found a robust accumulation of the monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) in plasma of ASD-diagnosed males exposed to CAF during fetal development. Biological assessment of MCP-1 signaling in brain confirms that systemic injection of MCP-1-neutralizing antibody reestablished social interaction and blocked anxiety, accompanied by a reduction in cerebellar lobule X (CbX) volume and an increase volume of the primary somatosensory (SSP) cortex in male offspring. These data highlight the contribution of diet-dependent MCP-1 signaling on volumetric brain changes and microglia morphology promoting ASD-like behavior in male mice.
34797471|a|We evaluated the effectiveness of a statewide Medicaid program providing in-home Early Intensive Behavioral Intervention services to young children with Autism Spectrum Disorder living in a rural southern state. Program effectiveness was assessed via the Assessment of Basic Language and Learning Skills-Revised (ABLLS-R). A multi-level growth model was used to show significant variation among children's initial ABLLS-R scores and their growth trajectories. Hispanic children tended to have lower initial scores but demonstrated similar growth compared to their non-Hispanic peers. Children who were older at initial start in the program appeared to have higher initial composite scores and higher growth trajectories. Children in more populous counties had higher initial scores but grew at similar rates to children in more rural counties.
34797470|a|Over the past 10 years, identification of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) risk has dramatically increased due to the wide-spread implementation of screening programs; yet, there is limited understanding about parent perceptions and experiences during the time period when risk is identified, but prior to receiving a formal diagnosis-a period that can last months to years given the long wait-lists for formal ASD evaluations. The current study aimed to examine parent perceptions of family impact (i.e., the impact their child's behaviors have on the family) between the time of risk-identification and formal diagnosis among 277 children identified as at-risk for ASD through screening positive in primary care. We aimed to compare family impact among those whose child met diagnostic criteria for ASD and those who did not. Parents of children who received a non-ASD diagnosis reported a higher baseline level of family impact (F[1, 274] = 5.82, p = .017); however, perceived difficult child behavior was a stronger predictor of family impact (t[6] = 13.11, p < .001) than later diagnostic group (t[6] = - 2.10, p = .037), and child functioning did not predict family impact (t[6] = -0.31, p = .76). These results suggest that in this population, perceived difficult child behavior is a stronger predictor of family impact than later diagnostic category and should be considered an important factor in family support.
34797406|a|The uptake and efflux of solutes across a plasma membrane is controlled by transporters. There are two main superfamilies of transporters, adenosine 5'-triphosphate (ATP) binding cassettes (ABCs) and solute carriers (SLCs). In the brain, SLC transporters are involved in transporting various solutes across the blood-brain barrier, blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier, astrocytes, neurons, and other brain cell types including oligodendrocytes and microglial cells. SLCs play an important role in maintaining normal brain function. Hence, mutations in the genes that encode SLC transporters can cause a variety of neurological disorders. We identified the following SLC gene variants in 25 patients in our cohort: SLC1A2, SLC2A1, SLC5A1, SLC6A3, SLC6A5, SLC6A8, SLC9A6, SLC9A9, SLC12A6, SLC13A5, SLC16A1, SLC17A5, SLC19A3, SLC25A12, SLC25A15, SLC27A4, SLC45A1, SLC46A1, and SLC52A3. Eight patients harbored pathogenic or likely pathogenic mutations (SLC5A1, SLC9A6, SLC12A6, SLC16A1, SLC19A3, and SLC52A3), and 12 patients were found to have variants of unknown clinical significance (VOUS); these variants occurred in 11 genes (SLC1A2, SLC2A1, SLC6A3, SLC6A5, SLC6A8, SLC9A6, SLC9A9, SLC13A5, SLC25A12, SLC27A4, and SLC45A1). Five patients were excluded as they were carriers. In the remaining 20 patients with SLC gene variants, we identified 16 possible distinct neurological disorders. Based on the clinical presentation, we categorized them into genes causing intellectual delay (ID) or autism spectrum disorder (ASD), those causing epilepsy, those causing vitamin-related disorders, and those causing other neurological diseases. Several variants were detected that indicated possible personalized therapies: SLC2A1 led to dystonia or epilepsy, which can be treated with a ketogenic diet; SLC6A3 led to infantile parkinsonism-dystonia 1, which can be treated with levodopa; SLC6A5 led to hyperekplexia 3, for which unnecessary treatment with antiepileptic drugs should be avoided; SLC6A8 led to creatine deficiency syndrome type 1, which can be treated with creatine monohydrate; SLC16A1 led to monocarboxylate transporter 1 deficiency, which causes seizures that should not be treated with a ketogenic diet; SLC19A3 led to biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease, which can be treated with biotin and thiamine; and SLC52A3 led to Brown-Vialetto-Van-Laere syndrome 1, which can be treated with riboflavin. The present study examines the prevalence of SLC gene mutations in our cohort of children with epilepsy and other neurological disorders. It highlights the diverse phenotypes associated with mutations in this large family of SLC transporter proteins, and an opportunity for personalized genomics and personalized therapeutics.
34797272|a|BACKGROUND: Job-related stress undermines occupational, personal, and organizational outcomes. Stress symptoms are common among teachers of children with autism spectrum disorders and affect the academic progress of the children. This study investigated the effectiveness of yoga-based cognitive behavioral therapy in reducing occupational stress among teachers of children with autism in Lagos states, Nigeria. METHODS: The current study adopted a group-randomized waitlist control (WLC) trial design with pre-test, posttest, and follow-up assessments. Participants included 58 teachers of children with autism in public and private special schools in Lagos state. Participants were randomly assigned to combined cognitive behavioral therapy and yoga (Y-CBT) (N = 29) and WLC (N = 29) groups. The Y-CBT group participated in a 2 hours Y-CBT program weekly for 12 weeks. Three instruments - Demographic Questionnaire, Single-Item Stress Questionnaire, and Teachers' Stress Inventory (TSI) were used to collect data. Data were collected at baseline; posttest and follow-up evaluations. Data were analyzed using means, standard deviations, t test statistics, repeated measures analysis of variance, and bar charts. RESULTS: Results revealed that all dimensions of job stress (perception of stress sources, stress manifestation, and total TSI scores) reduced significantly at posttest and follow up assessments among the Y-CBT group, compared to the WLC. CONCLUSION: It was concluded that Y-CBT modalities could help to minimize the perception of stress sources and stress manifestation as well as total TSI scores among teachers of children with autism spectrum disorders.
34797038|a|Traditional longitudinal modeling approaches require normally distributed data and do not account for sample heterogeneity. Parenting stress, in particular, can be difficult to model across time without transforming the data as it is usually high for caregivers of children with ASD. This study used novel linear quantile mixed models (LQMMs) to model non-normal parent stress scores across two caregiver-mediated interventions involving toddlers with ASD. The sample included 86 caregiver-child dyads who were randomized to either a parent-only psychoeducational intervention or hands-on parent training in a naturalistic developmental intervention. Child and parent-related domains of the Parenting Stress Index (PSI) were the primary outcomes in this study. The PSI was collected at entry, 10-week exit, 3-month follow-up, and 6-month follow-up periods. Separate LQMMs were used to model five specific quantiles ( tau = 0.1 , 0.25 , 0.5 , 0.75 , and  0.9 ) of the two PSI domains across the complete intervention timeline. These five quantiles effectively modeled the entire conditional distribution of parenting stress scores. The LQMMs indicated that child-related parenting stress decreased across all quantiles within both interventions, with no difference in the rate of parenting stress change between the intervention groups. For parent-related parenting stress, the effect of intervention depended on the group's stress level; some parents increased their perceived stress within the hands-on intervention at the 3-month follow-up. Overall, this study demonstrated that the use of LQMMs yielded additional information, beyond traditional longitudinal models, regarding the relationship between parenting stress within two caregiver-mediated intervention protocols. This study also discussed the methodological contributions and potential future applications of LQMMs. LAY SUMMARY: This study used a newer longitudinal modeling technique to examine how parenting stress changed across two caregiver-mediated interventions for toddlers with ASD. Results showed that certain parents in the JASPER condition might require additional support as they exit the study and enter into their first follow-up period. It was also determined that this new modeling technique could be a valuable tool to analyze highly variable data often present in ASD intervention studies.
34796421|a|This study evaluated the fidelity and effectiveness of a parent coach training program for toddlers at risk for autism spectrum disorder and identified factors required for successful training implementation under real-world conditions. Training addressed four tiers of clinical competence and was delivered to early intervention providers across 23 partner agencies in a large Canadian province. Results indicated that mean trainee fidelity scores were within the range reported in previous community-based training studies but there was considerable variability across trainees. Implementation facilitators included agency learning climate, leadership support, and trainee readiness for change. Implementation barriers included time/caseload demands and challenges related to technology learning and infrastructure. Results have implications for parent coach training in community settings.
34795561|a|Accumulating evidence suggests that the serum response factor (SRF) cofactor megakaryoblastic leukemia (MKL)/myocardin-related transcription factor (MRTF) has critical roles in many physiological and pathological processes in various cell types. MKL/MRTF molecules comprise MKL1/MRTFA and MKL2/MRTFB, which possess actin-binding motifs at the N-terminus, and SRF-binding domains and a transcriptional activation domain (TAD) at the C-terminus. Several studies have reported that, in association with actin rearrangement, MKL/MRTF translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, where it regulates SRF-mediated gene expression and controls cell motility. Therefore, it is important to elucidate the roles of MKL/MRTF in the nervous system with regard to its structural and functional regulation by extracellular stimuli. We demonstrated that MKL/MRTF is highly expressed in the brain, especially the synapses, and is involved in dendritic complexity and dendritic spine maturation. In addition to the positive regulation of dendritic complexity, we identified several MKL/MRTF isoforms that negatively regulate dendritic complexity in cortical neurons. We found that the MKL/MRTF isoforms were expressed differentially during brain development and the impacts of these isoforms on the immediate early genes including Arc/Arg3.1, were different. Here, we review the roles of MKL/MRTF in the nervous system, with a special focus on the MKL/MRTF-mediated fine-tuning of neuronal morphology and gene transcription. In the concluding remarks, we briefly discuss the future perspectives and the possible involvement of MKL/MRTF in neurological disorders such as schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorder.
34795340|a|Hypothalamic oxytocin (OXT) and arginine-vasopressin (AVP) neurons have been at the center of several physiological and behavioral studies. Advances in viral vector biology and the development of transgenic rodent models have allowed for targeted gene expression to study the functions of specific cell populations and brain circuits. In this study, we compared the efficiency of various adeno-associated viral vectors in these cell populations and demonstrated that none of the widely used promoters were, on their own, effective at driving expression of a down-stream fluorescent protein in OXT or AVP neurons. As anticipated, the OXT promoter could efficiently drive gene expression in OXT neurons and this efficiency is solely attributed to the promoter and not the viral serotype. We also report that a dual virus approach using an OXT promoter driven Cre recombinase significantly improved the efficiency of viral transduction in OXT neurons. Finally, we demonstrate the utility of the OXT promoter for conducting functional studies on OXT neurons by using an OXT specific viral system to record neural activity of OXT neurons in lactating female rats across time. We conclude that extreme caution is needed when employing non-neuron-specific viral approaches/promoters to study neural populations within the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus.
34794811|a|Gilles de la Tourette Syndrome (GTS) is a multifactorial neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by tics and multiple comorbidities. The pathophysiology is not yet fully understood, but both environmental and genetic risk factors seem to be involved. Twin studies provide important knowledge on genetic factors. We assessed the concordance of GTS and chronic tic disorders (CTD) in monozygotic (MZ) twins, and examined tic severity, symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorder. Twin pairs, where at least one twin was diagnosed with any tic disorder, were identified through Danish Twin Registry, Psychiatric Central Registry, Danish National Patient Registry and National Tourette Clinic, Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev. Zygosity was tested with single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping and clinical assessment was done with validated tools. 14 MZ twin pairs were included: five were discordant. Seven twin pairs were concordant for GTS, and for two pairs one twin had GTS and the other CTD. Among the twins with CTD or GTS, 50% had at least one comorbidity, which is higher than in background populations. The GTS + OCD-phenotype was significantly more frequent among GTS-concordant than among discordant twins. No statistically significant differences were found between the GTS-concordant and discordant twin pairs regarding tic severity or comorbidities. Thorough clinical assessment and SNP-based genotyping are important when conducting clinical twin studies. We found high concordance of GTS and CTD, which supports the notion that both disorders have common genetic risk factors. Further studies with larger cohorts including dizygotic twins are warranted for more conclusive results.
34793863|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) might be associated with oxidative stress, and antioxidants are commonly used in the treatment of young people with ASD. However, the evidence about the effectiveness of these interventions remains debatable. We performed a meta-analysis to evaluate the effect of antioxidants on the symptoms of patients with autism. METHODS: Data sources: PubMed and Web of Science databases. STUDY SELECTION: We selected placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized clinical trials published until February 2021 to evaluate the efficacy of antioxidant interventions on ASD. DATA ANALYSIS: Aberrant Behavior Checklist (ABC), Repetitive Behavior Scale-Revised (RBS), Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS), Developmental Behavior Checklist (DBC) and Clinical Global Impressions Severity scale (CGIS) were used to evaluate the 22 different symptom outcomes. The Hedges-adjusted g value was used to estimate the effect of each dietary intervention relative to the placebo. RESULTS: In this meta-analysis, we examined 13 double-blind randomized clinical trials, comprising a total of 570 patients with ASD: 293 in the intervention group and 277 in the placebo group. Antioxidants (N-acetylcysteine (NAC), other antioxidants) are more effective than placebos in improving the irritability among symptoms in the ABC and communication disturbance symptoms in the DBC. There was a good trend of improvement in the stereotypic behavior symptoms in the ABC. Treatment with NAC antioxidants showed a good trend of improvement in irritability in the ABC and symptoms of hyperactivity. The effect size was small, and there was a low risk of statistical heterogeneity and publication bias. LIMITATIONS: The number of studies in this meta-analysis was small and the sample size was small. CONCLUSION: This meta-analysis suggests that antioxidant intervention has a potential role in the management of some symptoms in patients with ASD, and indicates the feasibility of using antioxidants to treat autism in the future.
34793435|a|Over the past decade, biomarker discovery has become a key goal in psychiatry to aid in the more reliable diagnosis and prognosis of heterogeneous psychiatric conditions and the development of tailored therapies. Nevertheless, the prevailing statistical approach is still the mean group comparison between "cases" and "controls," which tends to ignore within-group variability. In this educational article, we used empirical data simulations to investigate how effect size, sample size, and the shape of distributions impact the interpretation of mean group differences for biomarker discovery. We then applied these statistical criteria to evaluate biomarker discovery in one area of psychiatric research-autism research. Across the most influential areas of autism research, effect size estimates ranged from small (d = 0.21, anatomical structure) to medium (d = 0.36 electrophysiology, d = 0.5, eye-tracking) to large (d = 1.1 theory of mind). We show that in normal distributions, this translates to approximately 45% to 63% of cases performing within 1 standard deviation (SD) of the typical range, i.e., they do not have a deficit/atypicality in a statistical sense. For a measure to have diagnostic utility as defined by 80% sensitivity and 80% specificity, Cohen's d of 1.66 is required, with still 40% of cases falling within 1 SD. However, in both normal and nonnormal distributions, 1 (skewness) or 2 (platykurtic, bimodal) biologically plausible subgroups may exist despite small or even nonsignificant mean group differences. This conclusion drastically contrasts the way mean group differences are frequently reported. Over 95% of studies omitted the "on average" when summarising their findings in their abstracts ("autistic people have deficits in X"), which can be misleading as it implies that the group-level difference applies to all individuals in that group. We outline practical approaches and steps for researchers to explore mean group comparisons for the discovery of stratification biomarkers.
34792882|a|According to the literature, the main neurological complications of COVID-19 are hyposmia, hypogeia, headache, dizziness, myalgia, and severe neurological syndromes like encephalopathy, stroke, and coma. The mechanisms of neurological complications of the acute period are direct viral damage, hypoxic damage, and immune damage due to the activation of inflammation, including autoantibodies. After the end of the acute phase of the disease, neurological complications in the form of asthenic syndrome, vascular syndrome, exacerbation of chronic diseases (deterioration of cognitive and communication functions in patients with autism, schizophrenia, exacerbation of autoimmune neurological diseases, aggravation of the condition of patients with tics, increased frequency of epileptic seizures in adults and children, resumption of epileptic seizures in patients who were previously in stable remission, the debut of epileptic seizures). These disorders are based on the following mechanisms: neuroinflammation, activation of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, -2, -6, -8, -10, -17, -18, CXCL10, CCL2), formation of autoantibodies, increased permeability of the blood-brain barrier, mitochondrial dysfunction, adrenal and thyroid dysfunction, venous dyscirculation. In the treatment of neurological complications after a COVID-19 infection, it is advisable to use anti-inflammatory therapy, mitochondrial therapy (including the technique of intermittent hypoxic-hyperoxic therapy), detoxication, correction of hormonal status (primarily the state of the adrenal glands and thyroid gland), vasoactive therapy, and symptomatic therapy.
34792727|a|BACKGROUND: Folate has a pivotal role in maintaining different cellular processes including DNA integrity and neurotransmitter levels. Further, folate deficiency was reported in subjects with neuropsychiatric disorders including autism spectrum disorder (ASD). METHODS AND RESULTS: We recruited ASD probands following the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder-IV/-5. Severity was assessed by the Childhood Autism Rating Scale2-Standard Test (CARS2-ST). Functional SNPs in reduced folate carrier1 (rs1051266), methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase (rs2236225), methylenetetrahydrofolate methyltransferase (rs1805087), methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (rs1801133 and rs1801131), cystathionine-beta- synthase (rs5742905), and serine hydroxymethyltransferase (rs1979277) genes were analyzed in the ASD probands (N = 203), their parents and controls (N = 250) by PCR/TaqMan based methods. Plasma homocysteine and vitamin B12 levels were examined by Enzyme-Linked ImmunoSorbent Assay. Statistical analysis revealed higher frequencies of rs1051266 and rs1805087 "A" alleles (P = 8.233e-005 and P = 0.010 respectively) and rs1051266 "AA" genotype (P = 0.02) in the ASD probands. Gender based stratified analysis revealed higher frequency of rs1051266 "AA" in the male probands (P = 0.001) while frequencies of rs1805087 "A" (P = 0.001) and "AA" (P < 0.05), and rs2236225 "CC" (P = 0.03) were higher in the females. The case-control analysis also exhibited a significant difference in the occurrence of biallelic and triallelic haplotypes. rs1051266 "A", rs1979277 "T" and rs5742905 "C" alleles showed biased parental transmission (P = 0.02). CARS2-ST scores were higher in the presence of rs5742905 "T" while scores were lower in the presence of rs1979277 "T" and rs1051266 "A". ASD probands showed vitamin B12 deficiency. CONCLUSION: Based on these observations, we infer that components needed for proper folate metabolism may influence ASD severity in this population.
34792711|a|How do we decide whether a statement is literally true? Here, we contrast participants' eventual evaluations of a speaker's meaning with the real-time processes of comprehension. We record participants' eye movements as they respond to potentially misleading instructions to click on one of two objects which might be concealing treasure (the treasure is behind thee, uh, hat). Participants are less likely to click on the named object when the instructions are disfluent. However, when hearing disfluent utterances, a tendency to fixate the named object early increases with participants' autism quotient scores. This suggests that, even where utterances are equivalently understood, the processes by which interpretations are achieved vary across individuals.
34792710|a|The study investigated association between attachment style of parents with a child diagnosed with Autism and mental health. A cross-sectional web-based survey collected data from 184 parents of individuals with autism. Findings from the study indicated association between an avoidant and anxious attachment style and mental health. Mainly, a link between avoidant attachment style and parents' levels of suicidal ideation and depression, an association between anxious attachment style and the parent's level of suicidal ideation, depression and anxiety. Several sociodemographic variables were associated with suicidal ideation and mental health. Specifically, we identified impacts of child's race on suicidal ideation, marital status on depression as well as impact of education on anxiety. Implication for future research, assessment and treatment are presented.
34792540|a|IMPORTANCE: Vestibular and proprioceptive functions play a critical role in occupational performance and participation. Assessment of these functions in a reliable and valid manner is part of a comprehensive assessment in the Ayres Sensory Integration  frame of reference, commonly applied in pediatric occupational therapy. OBJECTIVE: To report on reliability and validity of six tests of vestibular and proprioceptive functions of the Evaluation in Ayres Sensory Integration (EASI). DESIGN: We used Rasch analyses to examine and modify the number of items and scoring categories on the six tests and known-groups analysis to examine group differences. We evaluated internal consistency using Cronbach's alpha and Rasch person reliability. PARTICIPANTS: The sample contained typically developing children (n = 150) and children with sensory integration concerns (n = 84); all participated voluntarily. Outcomes and Measures: The EASI is used to measure sensory and motor functions in children ages 3 to 12 yr. The six tests of vestibular and proprioceptive functions were analyzed in this study. RESULTS: Data from >96% of items conformed to the expectations of the model. We found statistically significant group differences (ps < .001-.128; ds = 0.20-1.31), with the typically developing children group scoring significantly higher on all but one test, and moderate to strong evidence of internal consistency (Rasch person-reliability indices >= 0.80; strata > 3) for five of six tests. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The EASI vestibular and proprioceptive tests have strong construct validity and internal reliability, indicating that they are psychometrically sound clinical measures. What This Article Adds: The development of occupational therapy assessments with strong psychometric properties, such as the EASI tests of vestibular and proprioceptive functions, enhances clinical practice and research by elucidating the factors affecting participation in accurate and dependable ways so that occupational therapy interventions can be focused and effective.
34792299|a|Whether autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is associated with a global processing deficit remains controversial. Global integration requires extraction of regularity across various timescales, yet little is known about how individuals with ASD process regularity at local (short timescale) versus global (long timescale) levels. To this end, we used event-related potentials to investigate whether individuals with ASD would show different neural responses to local (within trial) versus global (across trials) emotion regularities extracted from sequential facial expressions; and if so, whether this visual abnormality would generalize to the music (auditory) domain. Twenty individuals with ASD and 21 age- and IQ-matched individuals with typical development participated in this study. At an early processing stage, ASD participants exhibited preserved neural responses to violations of local emotion regularity for both faces and music. At a later stage, however, there was an absence of neural responses in ASD to violations of global emotion regularity for both faces and music. These findings suggest that the autistic brain responses to emotion regularity are modulated by the timescale of sequential stimuli, and provide insight into the neural mechanisms underlying emotional processing in ASD.
34791925|a|AbstractAutism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by impairment in sensory modulation. These sensory modulation deficits would ultimately lead them to difficulties in adaptive behavior and intellectual functioning. The purpose of this study was to observe changes in the nervous system with responses to auditory/visual and only audio stimuli in children with autism and typically developing (TD) through electroencephalography (EEG). In this study, 20 children with ASD and 20 children with TD were considered to investigate the difference in the neural dynamics. The neural dynamics could be understood by non-linear analysis of the EEG signal. In this research to reveal the underlying nonlinear EEG dynamics, recurrence quantification analysis (RQA) is applied. RQA measures were analyzed using various parameter changes in RQA computations. In this research, the cosine distance metric was considered due to its capability of information retrieval and the other distance metrics parameters are compared for identifying the best biomarker. Each computational combination of the RQA measure and the responding channel was analyzed and discussed. To classify ASD and TD, the resulting features from RQA were fed to the designed BiLSTM (bi-long short-term memory) network. The classification accuracy was tested channel-wise for each combination. T3 and T5 channels with neighborhood selection as FAN (fixed amount of nearest neighbors) and distance metric as cosine is considered as the best-suited combination to discriminate between ASD and TD with the classification accuracy of 91.86%, respectively.
34791301|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are a set of neurodevelopmental disorders marked by a lack of social interaction, restrictive interests and repetitive behaviors. There is a paucity of pharmacological treatments to reduce core ASD symptoms. Various lines of evidence indicate that reduced brain muscarinic cholinergic receptor activity may contribute to an ASD phenotype. METHODS: The present experiments examined whether the partial M1 muscarinic receptor agonist, CDD-0102A, alleviates behavioral flexibility deficits and/or stereotyped motor behaviors in the BTBR mouse model of autism. Behavioral flexibility was tested using a reversal learning test. Stereotyped motor behaviors were measured by eliciting digging behavior after removal of nesting material in a home cage and by measuring repetitive grooming. RESULTS: CDD-0102A (0.2 and 0.6 mg/kg but not 1.2 mg/kg) injected prior to reversal learning attenuated a deficit in BTBR mice, but did not affect performance in B6 mice. Acute CDD-0102A treatment (1.2 and 3 mg/kg) reduced self-grooming in BTBR mice and reduced digging behavior in B6 and BTBR mice. The M1 muscarinic receptor antagonist, VU0255035 (3 mg/kg) blocked the effect of CDD-0102A on grooming behavior. Chronic treatment with CDD-0102A (1.2 mg/kg) attenuated self-grooming and digging behavior in BTBR mice. Direct CDD-0102A infusions (1 microg) into the dorsal striatum reduced elevated digging behavior in BTBR mice. In contrast, CDD-0102A injections in the frontal cortex were not effective. CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that treatment with a partial M1 muscarinic receptor agonist may reduce repetitive behaviors and restricted interests in autism in part by stimulating striatal M1 muscarinic receptors.
34791268|a|BACKGROUND: Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is caused by mutations in the FMR1 gene. It is a form of heritable intellectual disability and autism. Despite recent advance in elucidating disease mechanisms, there is no efficacious medication. As de novo drug development is a lengthy process, repurposing the existing FDA-approved drugs offers an opportunity to advance clinical intervention for FXS. Our previous study with transcriptome analysis predicts potential therapeutic effects of vorinostat on FXS. METHODS: We analyze the vorinostat-induced transcriptome changes and confirm its similarity to that induced by trifluoperazine, which is previously shown to correct pathological outcomes associated with FXS. To validate the therapeutic efficacy, we examine vorinostat effect on correcting the key behavioral and cellular symptoms in a mouse model of FXS. RESULTS: We find that the vorinostat restores object location memory and passive avoidance memory in the Fmr1 knockout (KO) mice. For the non-cognitive behavioral symptoms, vorinostat corrects the autism-associated alterations, including repetitive behavior and social interaction deficits. In the open field test, vorinostat dampens hyperactivity in the center area of the arena. Surprisingly, vorinostat does not correct the abnormally elevated protein synthesis in cultured Fmr1 KO hippocampal neurons, suggesting that different aspects of pathological outcomes may respond differently to a specific therapeutic intervention. CONCLUSIONS: We use the drug-induced transcriptome signature to predict new application of the existing drugs. Our data reveal the therapeutic effects of the FDA-approved drug vorinostat in a mouse model of FXS.
34791082|a|Limited sample size hinders the application of deep learning in brain image analysis, and transfer learning is a possible solution. However, most pretrained models are 2D based and cannot be applied directly to 3D brain images. In this study, we propose a novel framework to apply 2D pretrained models to 3D brain images by projecting surface-based cortical morphometry into planar images using computational geometry mapping. Firstly, 3D cortical meshes are reconstructed from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) using FreeSurfer and projected into 2D planar meshes with topological preservation based on area-preserving geometry mapping. Then, 2D deep models pretrained on ImageNet are adopted and fine-tuned for cortical image classification on morphometric shape metrics. We apply the framework to sex classification on the Human Connectome Project dataset and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) classification on the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange dataset. Moreover, a 2-stage transfer learning strategy is suggested to boost the ASD classification performance by using the sex classification as an intermediate task. Our framework brings significant improvement in sex classification and ASD classification with transfer learning. In summary, the proposed framework builds a bridge between 3D cortical data and 2D models, making 2D pretrained models available for brain image analysis in cognitive and psychiatric neuroscience.
34791077|a|Abnormal tactile response is an integral feature of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs), and hypo-responsiveness to tactile stimuli is often associated with the severity of ASDs core symptoms. Patients with Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS), caused by mutations in the SHANK3 gene, show ASD-like symptoms associated with aberrant tactile responses. The neural underpinnings of these abnormalities are still poorly understood. Here we investigated, in Shank3b-/- adult mice, the neural substrates of whisker-guided behaviors, a key component of rodents' interaction with the surrounding environment. We assessed whisker-dependent behaviors in Shank3b-/- adult mice and age-matched controls, using the textured novel object recognition (tNORT) and whisker nuisance (WN) test. Shank3b-/- mice showed deficits in whisker-dependent texture discrimination in tNORT and behavioral hypo-responsiveness to repetitive whisker stimulation in WN. Sensory hypo-responsiveness was accompanied by a significantly reduced activation of the primary somatosensory cortex (S1) and hippocampus, as measured by c-fos mRNA induction, a proxy of neuronal activity following whisker stimulation. Moreover, resting-state fMRI showed a significantly reduced S1-hippocampal connectivity in Shank3b mutants, in the absence of altered connectivity between S1 and other somatosensory areas. Impaired crosstalk between hippocampus and S1 might underlie Shank3b-/- hypo-reactivity to whisker-dependent cues, highlighting a potentially generalizable somatosensory dysfunction in ASD.
34791060|a|
34791032|a|OBJECTIVES: The present study aimed to develop a clinical decision support tool to assist coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) diagnoses with machine learning (ML) models using routine laboratory test results. METHODS: We developed ML models using laboratory data (n = 1,391) composed of six clinical chemistry (CC) results, 14 CBC parameter results, and results of a severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction as a gold standard method. Four ML algorithms, including random forest (RF), gradient boosting (XGBoost), support vector machine (SVM), and logistic regression, were used to build eight ML models using CBC and a combination of CC and CBC parameters. Performance evaluation was conducted on the test data set and external validation data set from Brazil. RESULTS: The accuracy values of all models ranged from 74% to 91%. The RF model trained from CC and CBC analytes showed the best performance on the present study's data set (accuracy, 85.3%; sensitivity, 79.6%; specificity, 91.2%). The RF model trained from only CBC parameters detected COVID-19 cases with 82.8% accuracy. The best performance on the external validation data set belonged to the SVM model trained from CC and CBC parameters (accuracy, 91.18%; sensitivity, 100%; specificity, 84.21%). CONCLUSIONS: ML models presented in this study can be used as clinical decision support tools to contribute to physicians' clinical judgment for COVID-19 diagnoses.
34790583|a|Background: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are complex behavioral changes manifesting early in childhood, which impacts how an individual perceives and socializes with others. The study aims to assess the disparities in gut microbiota (GM) amongst healthy controls and children with ASD. Methods: The study was performed on 25 children with ASD and 20 healthy children. Autistic symptoms were diagnosed and assessed with the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders and the Autism Treatment Evaluation Checklist (ATEC). Gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms were assessed with a GI Severity Index (GSI) questionnaire. The fecal bacteria composition was investigated by the high-throughput sequencing of the V3-V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene. The alpha diversity was estimated using the Shannon, Chao, and ACE indexes. The unweighted UniFrac analysis and the PCA plots were used to represent the beta diversity. LDA and LEfSe were used to assess the effect sizes of each abundant differential taxon. Results: Children with high GSI scores had much higher ATEC Total scores than those with lower GSI-scores. GI symptoms were strongly associated with symptoms of ASD. There was no difference in Chao, ACE, and Shannon indexes between ASD patients and healthy controls. Both groups showed a significant microbiota structure clustering in the plotted PCAs and significant differences in its composition at the family, order, genus, and phyla levels. There were also noteworthy overall relative differences in Actinobacteria and Firmicutes between both groups. Conclusions: This study shows the relationship between the clinical manifestations of Autistic symptoms and GI symptoms. ASD patients have dysbiosis of gut microbiota, which may be related to the onset of ASD. These findings may be beneficial for developing ASD symptoms by changing gut microbiota.
34790476|a|Diagnoses of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are typically made after toddlerhood by examining behavioural patterns. Earlier identification of ASD enables earlier intervention and better outcomes. Machine learning provides a data-driven approach of diagnosing autism at an earlier age. This review aims to summarize recent studies and technologies utilizing machine learning based strategies to screen infants and children under the age of 18 months for ASD, and identify gaps that can be addressed in the future. We reviewed nine studies based on our search criteria, which includes primary studies and technologies conducted within the last 10 years that examine children with ASD or at high risk of ASD with a mean age of less than 18 months old. The studies must use machine learning analysis of behavioural features of ASD as major methodology. A total of nine studies were reviewed, of which the sensitivity ranges from 60.7% to 95.6%, the specificity ranges from 50% to 100%, and the accuracy ranges from 60.9% to 97.7%. Factors that contribute to the inconsistent findings include the varied presentation of ASD among patients and study design differences. Previous studies have shown moderate accuracy, sensitivity and specificity in the differentiation of ASD and non-ASD individuals under the age of 18 months. The application of machine learning and artificial intelligence in the screening of ASD in infants is still in its infancy, as observed by the granularity of data available for review. As such, much work needs to be done before the aforementioned technologies can be applied into clinical practice to facilitate early screening of ASD.
34790264|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neuro-developmental disorder that affects the social abilities of patients. Studies have shown that a small number of abnormal functional connections (FCs) exist in the cerebral hemisphere of ASD patients. The identification of these abnormal FCs provides a biological ground for the diagnosis of ASD. In this paper, we propose a combined deep feature selection (DFS) and graph convolutional network method to classify ASD. Firstly, in the DFS process, a sparse one-to-one layer is added between the input and the first hidden layer of a multilayer perceptron, thus each functional connection (FC) feature can be weighted and a subset of FC features can be selected accordingly. Then based on the selected FCs and the phenotypic information of subjects, a graph convolutional network is constructed to classify ASD and typically developed controls. Finally, we test our proposed method on the ABIDE database and compare it with some other methods in the literature. Experimental results indicate that the DFS can effectively select critical FC features for classification according to the weights of input FC features. With DFS, the performance of GCN classifier can be improved dramatically. The proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance with an accuracy of 79.5% and an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of 0.85 on the preprocessed ABIDE dataset; it is superior to the other methods. Further studies on the top-ranked thirty FCs obtained by DFS show that these FCs are widespread over the cerebral hemisphere, and the ASD group appears a significantly higher number of weak connections compared to the typically developed group.
34790142|a|Attenuated positive emotions and difficulties in regulating emotions are frequently observed in individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and are linked to increased risk of affective disorders, problematic behaviors, and impaired socio-emotional functioning. As such, interventions specifically focused on positive emotion regulation (ER) skills could be very valuable for individuals with ASD, their caregivers, and therapists. However, the field of positive ER in ASD is under-researched. The present study aimed at testing the practical potential and the preliminary effects of a brief novel psycho-educational training program on positive ER for individuals with ASD. Thirty male participants with ASD (aged 10-35years; N training=14, N waitlist=16) underwent a three-session program on the use of adaptive positive ER strategies (i.e., attentional deployment, cognitive change, and response modulation). Participants rated the program as easy to understand, interesting, pleasant, and likable. No dropouts or adverse effects were observed. The training group showed a significant increase in the self-reported use of the ER strategies compared to the waitlist group. The increase in the use of ER strategies maintained up to 7 weeks in the overall sample. Having reached high satisfaction rates and the intended effects in this proof of concept study, this novel program represents a promising tool to support ER. Future research should next investigate the efficacy of the intervention on day-to-day emotional experience and wellbeing. Clinical Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT02898298.
34790102|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder that affects one in 66 children in Canada. The contributions of changes in the cortex and cerebellum to autism have been studied for decades. However, our understanding of brainstem contributions has only started to emerge more recently. Disruptions of sensory processing, startle response, sensory filtering, sensorimotor gating, multisensory integration and sleep are all features of ASD and are processes in which the brainstem is involved. In addition, preliminary research into brainstem contribution emphasizes the importance of the developmental timeline rather than just the mature brainstem. Therefore, the purpose of this systematic review is to compile histological, behavioral, neuroimaging, and electrophysiological evidence from human and animal studies about brainstem contributions and their functional implications in autism. Moreover, due to the developmental nature of autism, the review pays attention to the atypical brainstem development and compares findings based on age. Overall, there is evidence of an important role of brainstem disruptions in ASD, but there is still the need to examine the brainstem across the life span, from infancy to adulthood which could lead the way for early diagnosis and possibly treatment of ASD.
34790092|a|The 21st century has seen dramatic changes in our understanding of the visual physio-perceptual anomalies of autism and also in the structure and development of the primate visual system. This review covers the past 20 years of research into motion perceptual/dorsal stream anomalies in autism, as well as new understanding of the development of primate vision. The convergence of this literature allows a novel developmental hypothesis to explain the physiological and perceptual differences of the broad autistic spectrum. Central to these observations is the development of motion areas MT+, the seat of the dorsal cortical stream, central area of pre-attentional processing as well as being an anchor of binocular vision for 3D action. Such development normally occurs via a transfer of thalamic drive from the inferior pulvinar   MT to the anatomically stronger but later-developing LGN   V1   MT connection. We propose that autistic variation arises from a slowing in the normal developmental attenuation of the pulvinar   MT pathway. We suggest that this is caused by a hyperactive amygdala   thalamic reticular nucleus circuit increasing activity in the PIm   MT via response gain modulation of the pulvinar and hence altering synaptic competition in area MT. We explore the probable timing of transfer in dominance of human MT from pulvinar to LGN/V1 driving circuitry and discuss the implications of the main hypothesis.
34790087|a|Previous research indicates elevated levels of clinically significant traits and symptoms of autism spectrum disorder and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children with chronic pain, but associations with functioning and depression are yet unclear. The current study examined the relationships of autistic traits and ADHD symptoms with pain interference, depression, and health-related quality of life, as well as the mediating roles of insomnia and psychological inflexibility, in children with chronic pain (n = 146, 8-17 years, 102 girls) presenting at a tertiary pain clinic. Children completed measures of pain intensity, depression, pain interference, health-related quality of life, insomnia, and psychological inflexibility. Parents (n = 146, 111 mothers) completed measures to assess autistic traits and ADHD symptoms in their children. Children with clinically significant autistic traits and ADHD symptoms presented with significantly higher levels of depressive symptoms and pain interference, and significantly lower health-related quality of life, than did the other children. Autistic traits and ADHD symptoms contributed significantly to the prediction of pain interference and depressive symptoms, as well as health-related quality of life. Psychological inflexibility mediated the relationships between ADHD symptoms and autistic traits on the one hand and depression, pain interference, and health-related quality of life on the other, while insomnia mediated the relationships between ADHD symptoms and depression, pain interference, and health-related quality of life. All analyses were adjusted for demographics and pain intensity. Results suggest the utility of screening for neurodevelopmental disorders in children with chronic pain. Furthermore, the findings may indicate insomnia and skills related to psychological flexibility as potential treatment targets in interventions aiming at improving functioning and health-related quality of life in children with chronic pain and co-occurring symptoms of neurodevelopmental disorders.
34789560|a|Understanding how neurons of the striatum are formed and integrate into complex synaptic circuits is essential to provide insight into striatal function in health and disease. In this review, we summarize our current understanding of the development of striatal neurons and associated circuits with a focus on their embryonic origin. Specifically, we address the role of distinct types of embryonic progenitors, found in the proliferative zones of the ganglionic eminences in the ventral telencephalon, in the generation of diverse striatal interneurons and projection neurons. Indeed, recent evidence would suggest that embryonic progenitor origin dictates key characteristics of postnatal cells, including their neurochemical content, their location within striatum, and their long-range synaptic inputs. We also integrate recent observations regarding embryonic progenitors in cortical and other regions and discuss how this might inform future research on the ganglionic eminences. Last, we examine how embryonic progenitor dysfunction can alter striatal formation, as exemplified in Huntington's disease and autism spectrum disorder, and how increased understanding of embryonic progenitors can have significant implications for future research directions and the development of improved therapeutic options.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT This review highlights recently defined novel roles for embryonic progenitor cells in shaping the functional properties of both projection neurons and interneurons of the striatum. It outlines the developmental mechanisms that guide neuronal development from progenitors in the embryonic ganglionic eminences to progeny in the striatum. Where questions remain open, we integrate observations from cortex and other regions to present possible avenues for future research. Last, we provide a progenitor-centric perspective onto both Huntington's disease and autism spectrum disorder. We suggest that future investigations and manipulations of embryonic progenitor cells in both research and clinical settings will likely require careful consideration of their great intrinsic diversity and neurogenic potential.
34789012|a|OBJECTIVE: Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is known to be substantially heritable; however, the contribution of genetic variation across the allele frequency spectrum to this heritability remains uncertain. The authors used two new homogeneous cohorts to estimate the heritability of OCD from inherited genetic variation and contrasted the results with those of previous studies. METHODS: The sample consisted of 2,090 Swedish-born individuals diagnosed with OCD and 4,567 control subjects, all genotyped for common genetic variants, specifically >400,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with minor allele frequency (MAF) >=0.01. Using genotypes of these SNPs to estimate distant familial relationships among individuals, the authors estimated the heritability of OCD, both overall and partitioned according to MAF bins. RESULTS: Narrow-sense heritability of OCD was estimated at 29% (SE=4%). The estimate was robust, varying only modestly under different models. Contrary to an earlier study, however, SNPs with MAF between 0.01 and 0.05 accounted for 10% of heritability, and estimated heritability per MAF bin roughly followed expectations based on a simple model for SNP-based heritability. CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that common inherited risk variation (MAF >=0.01) accounts for most of the heritable variation in OCD. SNPs with low MAF contribute meaningfully to the heritability of OCD, and the results are consistent with expectation under the "infinitesimal model" (also referred to as the "polygenic model"), where risk is influenced by a large number of loci across the genome and across MAF bins.
34788890|a|BACKGROUND:  Many children with autism cannot receive timely in-person diagnosis and therapy, especially in situations where access is limited by geography, socioeconomics, or global health concerns such as the current COVD-19 pandemic. Mobile solutions that work outside of traditional clinical environments can safeguard against gaps in access to quality care. OBJECTIVE:  The aim of the study is to examine the engagement level and therapeutic feasibility of a mobile game platform for children with autism. METHODS:  We designed a mobile application, GuessWhat, which, in its current form, delivers game-based therapy to children aged 3 to 12 in home settings through a smartphone. The phone, held by a caregiver on their forehead, displays one of a range of appropriate and therapeutically relevant prompts (e.g., a surprised face) that the child must recognize and mimic sufficiently to allow the caregiver to guess what is being imitated and proceed to the next prompt. Each game runs for 90 seconds to create a robust social exchange between the child and the caregiver. RESULTS:  We examined the therapeutic feasibility of GuessWhat in 72 children (75% male, average age 8 years 2 months) with autism who were asked to play the game for three 90-second sessions per day, 3 days per week, for a total of 4 weeks. The group showed significant improvements in Social Responsiveness Score-2 (SRS-2) total (3.97, p <0.001) and Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales-II (VABS-II) socialization standard (5.27, p = 0.002) scores. CONCLUSION:  The results support that the GuessWhat mobile game is a viable approach for efficacious treatment of autism and further support the possibility that the game can be used in natural settings to increase access to treatment when barriers to care exist.
34788842|a|OBJECTIVE.:: To propose an insurance product called special needs insurance. The insurance will pay parents a lump sum up to $100,000 if they have a child that is born with or develops a special needs condition such as Down syndrome, cerebral palsy or autism. BACKGROUND.:: Raising a child is expensive; raising a child with a special need can be hundreds of thousands of dollars more expensive. These additional costs include direct costs that are not covered by health insurance and indirect costs such as the loss of earnings when a working parent must tend to a special needs child. METHOD.:: We analyze a gamut of birth and early childhood disabilities, both physical and cognitive, from the medico-actuarial perspective. We describe each condition using relevant medical literature and calculate prevalence rates from epidemiological studies (appendix A1-A15). After accounting for multiple births, we develop a final premium. RESULTS.:: We find that physical impairments are sufficiently well understood to guarantee a fixed payout, whereas cognitive impairments such as autism are less understood, and so for these we propose a cognitive fund that does not guarantee a fixed payout. We find that an average single premium of $4,600 allows the insurer to profitably pay out the proposed benefits. CONCLUSIONS.:: Raising a special needs child can put a significant strain on the affected family's budget. We propose an insurance product that provides relief through a large lump sum payout. Although no new insurance product can be guaranteed success, our analysis of this product gives an interested insurer reasonable justification to take on this new risk.
34788807|a|Rahman syndrome (RMNS) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by mild to severe intellectual disability, hypotonia, anxiety, autism spectrum disorder, vision problems, bone abnormalities, and dysmorphic facies. RMNS is caused by de novo heterozygous mutations in the histone linker gene H1-4; however, mechanisms underlying impaired neurodevelopment in RMNS are not understood. All neurology associated mutations in H1-4 are small insertions or deletions that create a shared frameshift, resulting in a H1.4 protein that is both truncated and possessing an abnormal C-terminus frameshifted tail (H1.4 CFT). To expand understanding of mutations and phenotypes associated with mutant H1-4, we identified new variants at both the C- and N-terminus of H1.4. The clinical features of mutations identified at the C-terminus are consistent with other reports that strengthen the support of pathogenicity of H1.4 CFT. To understand how H1.4 CFT may disrupt brain function, we exogenously expressed wildtype or H1.4 CFT protein in rat hippocampal neurons and assessed neuronal structure and function. Genome-wide transcriptome analysis revealed ~ 400 genes altered in the presence of H1.4 CFT. Neuronal genes downregulated by H1.4 CFT were enriched for functional categories involved in synaptic communication and neuropeptide signaling. Neurons expressing H1.4 CFT also showed reduced activity on multielectrode arrays. These data are the first to characterize the transcriptional and functional consequence of H1.4 CFT in neurons. Our data provide insight into causes of neurodevelopmental impairments associated with frameshift mutations in the C-terminus of H1.4 and highlight the need for future studies on the function of histone H1.4 in neurons.
34788607|a|Mutations of SHANK3 cause Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS), and these individuals can exhibit sensitivity to stress, resulting in behavioral deterioration. Here, we examine the interaction of stress with genotype using a mouse model with face validity to PMS. In Shank3DeltaC/+ mice, swim stress produces an altered transcriptomic response in pyramidal neurons that impacts genes and pathways involved in synaptic function, signaling, and protein turnover. Homer1a, which is part of the Shank3-mGluR-N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor complex, is super-induced and is implicated in the stress response because stress-induced social deficits in Shank3DeltaC/+ mice are mitigated in Shank3DeltaC/+;Homer1a-/- mice. Several lines of evidence demonstrate that Shank3 expression is regulated by Homer1a in competition with crosslinking forms of Homer, and consistent with this model, Shank3 expression and function that are reduced in Shank3DeltaC/+ mice are rescued in Shank3DeltaC/+;Homer1a-/- mice. Studies highlight the interaction between stress and genetics and focus attention on activity-dependent changes that may contribute to pathogenesis.
34788279|a|Gene expression analysis is becoming increasingly utilized in neuro-immunology research, and there is a growing need for non-programming scientists to be able to analyze their own genomic data. MGEnrichment is a web application developed both to disseminate to the community our curated database of microglia-relevant gene lists, and to allow non-programming scientists to easily conduct statistical enrichment analysis on their gene expression data. Users can upload their own gene IDs to assess the relevance of their expression data against gene lists from other studies. We include example datasets of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) from human postmortem brain samples from Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and matched controls. We demonstrate how MGEnrichment can be used to expand the interpretations of these DEG lists in terms of regulation of microglial gene expression and provide novel insights into how ASD DEGs may be implicated specifically in microglial development, microbiome responses and relationships to other neuropsychiatric disorders. This tool will be particularly useful for those working in microglia, autism spectrum disorders, and neuro-immune activation research. MGEnrichment is available at https://ciernialab.shinyapps.io/MGEnrichmentApp/ and further online documentation and datasets can be found at https://github.com/ciernialab/MGEnrichmentApp. The app is released under the GNU GPLv3 open source license.
34788016|a|Bromopyrroles (BrPyr) are synthesized naturally by marine sponge symbionts and produced anthropogenically as byproducts of wastewater treatment. BrPyr interact with ryanodine receptors (RYRs) and sarco/endoplasmic reticulum (SR/ER) Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA). Influences of BrPyr on the neuronal network activity remain uncharted. BrPyr analogues with differing spectra of RYR/SERCA activities were tested using RYR-null or RYR1-expressing HEK293 and murine cortical neuronal/glial cocultures (NGCs) loaded with Fluo-4 to elucidate their mechanisms altering Ca2+ dynamics. The NGC electrical spike activity (ESA) was measured from NGCs plated on multielectrode arrays. Nanomolar tetrabromopyrrole (TBP, 1) potentiated caffeine-triggered Ca2+ release independent of extracellular [Ca2+] in RYR1-HEK293, whereas higher concentrations produce slow and sustained rise in cytoplasmic [Ca2+] independent of RYR1 expression. TBP, 2,3,5-tribromopyrrole (2), pyrrole (3), 2,3,4-tribromopyrrole (4), and ethyl 4-bromopyrrole-2-carboxylate (5) added acutely to NGC showed differential potency; rank order TBP (IC50   220 nM) > 2 >> 5, whereas 3 and 4 were inactive at 10 muM. TBP >2 muM elicited sustained elevation of cytoplasmic [Ca2+] and loss of neuronal viability. TBP did not alter network ESA. BrPyr from marine and anthropogenic sources are ecological signaling molecules and emerging anthropogenic pollutants of concern to environmental and human health that potently alter ER Ca2+ dynamics and warrant further investigation in vivo.
34787868|a|OBJECTIVE: Autism spectrum disorders are characterized by three characteristics: impairment in the quality of social relationships, severe impairment in communication, and restricted, repetitive behavioral patterns. The aim of this research is to determine the effect of logotherapy on the parent-child relationship among mothers of autistic children. PATIENTS AND METHODS: This research is a clinical trial with pre-test, post-test design, and control group. Forty mothers were selected and randomly assigned into two groups of intervention and control. The intervention group attended 10 sessions (90 min) of logotherapy, twice a week, while the control group received the routine intervention. A mother-child relationship evaluation questionnaire was used to collect data. SPSS statistical software was employed to analyze the data. RESULTS: The results showed that group logotherapy training affects the parent-child relationship in mothers of autistic children. We only examined the relatively short-term effects of logotherapy on parents' and children's outcomes because after the children's school year ended, their mothers did not refer to the center. In order to achieve accurate results, we recommend examining the long-term effects of this approach in future studies. CONCLUSIONS: Logotherapy is an effective approach to improve the parent-child relationship in mothers of autistic children.
34787751|a|BACKGROUND: Most children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) suffer from aberrant responses to sensory stimuli that significantly impact the quality of life. To develop sensory interventions, individually tailored outcome measures are crucially needed for the domain of sensory reactivity problems. Here, we describe the identification of relevant sensory themes according to caregivers of children with ASD according to the guidelines for developing a (parent proxy) patient-reported outcome measure set. Subsequently, we identify parallels between these themes and a well-validated and supported PROMIS  portal to facilitate implementation. Interviews with clinicians and focus groups and interviews with parents of children with ASD were used in the initial phase for concept elicitation. Codes and themes were generated by qualitative thematic data analysis on the transcripts and cognitive interviews with different parents were used for revisions. The resulting themes were compared to existing generic PROMIS-item banks and other existing questionnaires. RESULTS: A total of 11 parent-reported outcomes were identified that could be either classified as directly or indirectly related to sensory reactivity. Directly related themes comprised of: (1) sensory stimulation tolerance and (2) sensitivity to sensory stimuli. Indirectly related themes were: (3) irritable behavior (4) anxiety problems (5) mood problems (6) sleep problems (7) fatigue (8) physical complaints (9) daily functioning and participation (10) routines, structure and dealing with change and (11) problems in social interaction and communication. Seven out of 11 themes could be measured with generic PROMIS item banks. The four remaining outcomes (sensory stimulation tolerance; irritable behaviour; routines, structure and dealing with change; and sensitivity to sensory stimuli) were found suitable to be inventoried by existing PROMs. CONCLUSION: The majority of parent-reported problems seemed related to indirect consequences of sensory reactivity, which are suitable to be measured with generic item banks. In sum, we identified a sensory-reactivity PROM (parent-proxy) set consisting of PROMIS  item banks and additional domains that together form a comprehensive and readily available outcome set for sensory reactivity problems in children with ASD.
34786775|a|Oxytocin (OXT) neurons of the hypothalamus are at the center of several physiological functions, including milk ejection, uterus contraction, and maternal and social behavior. In lactating females, OXT neurons show a pattern of burst firing and inter-neuron synchronization during suckling that leads to pulsatile release of surges of OXT into the bloodstream to stimulate milk ejection. This pattern of firing and population synchronization may be facilitated in part by hypothalamic glutamatergic circuits, as has been observed in vitro using brain slices obtained from male rats and neonates. However, it remains unknown how hypothalamic glutamatergic circuits influence OXT cell activity outside the context of lactation. In this review, we summarize the in vivo and in vitro studies that describe the synchronized burst firing pattern of OXT neurons and the implication of hypothalamic glutamate in this pattern of firing. We also make note of the few studies that have traced glutamatergic afferents to the hypothalamic paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei. Finally, we discuss the genetic findings implicating several glutamatergic genes in neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism spectrum disorder, thus underscoring the need for future studies to investigate the impact of these mutations on hypothalamic glutamatergic circuits and the OXT system.
34786700|a|Social-communication differences are a robust and defining feature of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) but identifying early points of divergence in infancy has been a challenge. The current study examines social communication in 9- to 12-month-old infants who develop ASD (N = 30; 23% female; 70% white) compared to typically developing (TD) infants (N = 94, 38% female; 88% white). Results demonstrate that infants later diagnosed with ASD were already exhibiting fewer social-communication skills using eye gaze, facial expression, gestures, and sounds at 9 months (effect size: 0.42-0.89). Moreover, three unique patterns of change across distinct social-communication skills were observed within the ASD group. This study documents that observable social-communication differences for infants with ASD are unfolding by 9 months, pointing to a critical window for targeted intervention.
34786646|a|Previous studies have found reduced leftward bias of facial processing in individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). However, it is not clear whether they manifest a leftward bias in general visual processing. To shed light on this issue, the current study used the manual line bisection task to assess children 5 to 15 years of age with ASD as well as typically developing (TD) children. Results showed that children with ASD, similar to TD children, demonstrate a leftward bias in general visual processing, especially for bisecting long lines (  80 mm). In both groups, participant performance in line bisection was affected by the hand used, the length of the line, the cueing symbol, and the location of the symbol. The ASD group showed a rightward bias when bisecting short lines (30 mm) with their left hands, which slightly differed from the TD group. These results indicate that while ASD individuals and TD individuals share a similar leftward bias in general visual processing, when using their left hands to bisect short lines, ASD individuals may show an atypical bias pattern.
34786564|a|The phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) family plays a major role in cell signaling and is predominant in leukocytes. Gain-of-function (GOF) mutations in the PIK3CD gene lead to the development of activated PI3Kdelta syndrome (APDS), a rare primary immunodeficiency disorder. A subset of APDS patients also displays neurodevelopmental delay symptoms, suggesting a potential role of PIK3CD in cognitive and behavioural function. However, the extent and nature of the neurodevelopmental deficits has not been previously quantified. Here, we assessed the cognitive functions of two APDS patients, and investigated the causal role of the PIK3CD GOF mutation in neurological deficits using a murine model of this disease. We used p110deltaE1020K knock-in mice, harbouring the most common APDS mutation in patients. We found that APDS patients present with visuomotor deficits, exacerbated by autism spectrum disorder comorbidity, whereas p110deltaE1020K mice exhibited impairments in motor behaviour, learning and repetitive behaviour patterning. Our data indicate that PIK3CD GOF mutations increase the risk for neurodevelopmental deficits, supporting previous findings on the interplay between the nervous and the immune system. Further, our results validate the knock-in mouse model, and offer an objective assessment tool for patients that could be incorporated in diagnosis and in the evaluation of treatments.
34785716|a|Autism Spectrum disorder is one of the commonest and most important neurodevelopmental conditions affecting children today. With an increasing prevalence and an unclear aetiology, it is imperative we find early markers of autism, which may facilitate early identification and intervention. Alterations of gestational cytokine profiles have been reported in mothers of autistic children. Increasing evidence suggests that the intrauterine environment is an important determinant of autism risk. This study aims to examine the mid-gestational serum cytokine profiles of the mothers of autistic children from a well-characterised birth cohort. A nested sub-cohort within a large mother-child birth cohort were identified based on a confirmed multi-disciplinary diagnosis of autism before the age 10 years and neuro-typical matched controls in a 2:1 ratio. IFN-gamma, IL-1beta, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-17A, GMCSF and TNFalpha were measured in archived maternal 20-week serum using MesoScale Diagnostics multiplex technology and validation of our IL-17A measurements was performed using an ultrasensitive assay. From a cohort of 2137 children, 25 had confirmed autism before 10 years and stored maternal serum from mid-gestation. We examined the sera of these 25 cases and 50 matched controls. The sex ratio was 4:1 males to females in each group, and the mean age at diagnosis was 5.09 years (SD 2.13). We found that concentrations of IL-4 were significantly altered between groups. The other analytes did not differ significantly using either multiplex or ultra-sensitive assays. In our well-characterised prospective cohort of autistic children, we confirmed mid-gestational alterations in maternal IL-4 concentrations in autism affected pregnancies versus matched controls. These findings add to promising evidence from animal models and retrospective screening programmes and adds to the knowledge in this field.
34785645|a|Schizophrenia is a heterogeneous disorder, exhibiting variability in presentation and outcomes that complicate treatment and recovery. To explore this heterogeneity, we leverage the comprehensive Danish health registries to conduct a prospective, longitudinal study from birth of 5432 individuals who would ultimately be diagnosed with schizophrenia, building individual trajectories that represent sequences of comorbid diagnoses, and describing patterns in the individual-level variability. We show that psychiatric comorbidity is prevalent among individuals with schizophrenia (82%) and multi-morbidity occur more frequently in specific, time-ordered pairs. Three latent factors capture 79% of variation in longitudinal comorbidity and broadly relate to the number of co-occurring diagnoses, the presence of child versus adult comorbidities and substance abuse. Clustering of the factor scores revealed five stable clusters of individuals, associated with specific risk factors and outcomes. The presentation and course of schizophrenia may be associated with heterogeneity in etiological factors including family history of mental disorders.
34784904|a|BACKGROUND: Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) is a neurodevelopmental condition resulting from pre-natal alcohol exposure. In Canada, an estimated 1.4-4% of newborns are affected by FASD. FASD is often associated with behavioural comorbidities and many individuals require psychotropic medication. However, to date there are no FASD specific guidelines for prescribing medication. Recently, Mela and colleagues described four behavioural symptom clusters commonly seen in FASD with suggested pharmacologic treatment for each cluster within an algorithm. The primary objective was to compare the proposed treatment algorithm retrospectively to actual treatment in a real-world FASD pediatric practice. The secondary objective was to refine the description of symptom clusters which will be targeted with treatment. METHODS: We collected the diagnostic and medication history from all patient visits of a Regina Developmental Pediatrician who specializes in FASD diagnosis and medication treatment. Three hundred fifty-four FASD patients were identified between 2005 to 2020. The medications that would be predicted from the algorithm were compared to the real-world historical data. A positive case was defined as all algorithm-predicted medications matching the historical data; a negative case had one or more medications failing to match. RESULTS: Of the 354 patients, 36 were removed for insufficient information. Of the remaining 318 cases, 172 (54.1%) were positive compared to 146 (45.9%) negatives. In single prescription cases (n=147), the incidence of positives was 67.3%; in multi-prescriptions (n=72) it was 27.8%; and in cases where no prescription was needed (n=99), the positive incidence was 53.5%. CONCLUSIONS: The prescription algorithm is promising but requires further refinement to accommodate the range of presentations in children with FASD. With respect to unclassified symptoms, we propose the following: sleep onset difficulty as hyperarousal; gender dysphoria and obsessive compulsive disorder as cognitive inflexibility; grief as emotional regulation; and autism spectrum disorder as hyperactive/neurocognitive.
34784900|a|
34784886|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental condition, which is characterized by clinical heterogeneity and high heritability. Core symptoms of ASD include deficits in social communication and interaction, as well as restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities. Many genes have been identified that are associated with an increased risk for ASD. Proteins encoded by these ASD risk genes are often involved in processes related to fetal brain development, chromatin modification and regulation of gene expression in general, as well as the structural and functional integrity of synapses. Genes of the SH3 and multiple ankyrin repeat domains (SHANK) family encode crucial scaffolding proteins (SHANK1-3) of excitatory synapses and other macromolecular complexes. SHANK gene mutations are highly associated with ASD and more specifically the Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMDS), which is caused by heterozygous 22q13.3-deletion resulting in SHANK3-haploinsufficiency, or by SHANK3 missense variants. SHANK3 deficiency and potential treatment options have been extensively studied in animal models, especially in mice, but also in rats and non-human primates. However, few of the proposed therapeutic strategies have translated into clinical practice yet. MAIN TEXT: This review summarizes the literature concerning SHANK3-deficient animal models. In particular, the structural, behavioral, and neurological abnormalities are described and compared, providing a broad and comprehensive overview. Additionally, the underlying pathophysiologies and possible treatments that have been investigated in these models are discussed and evaluated with respect to their effect on ASD- or PMDS-associated phenotypes. CONCLUSIONS: Animal models of SHANK3 deficiency generated by various genetic strategies, which determine the composition of the residual SHANK3-isoforms and affected cell types, show phenotypes resembling ASD and PMDS. The phenotypic heterogeneity across multiple models and studies resembles the variation of clinical severity in human ASD and PMDS patients. Multiple therapeutic strategies have been proposed and tested in animal models, which might lead to translational implications for human patients with ASD and/or PMDS. Future studies should explore the effects of new therapeutic approaches that target genetic haploinsufficiency, like CRISPR-mediated activation of promotors.
34784634|a|OBJECTIVE:  To analyze the scientific production regarding maternal folic acid (FA) supplementation and its relationship with autistic spectrum disorder (ASD). DATA SOURCES:  We performed unrestricted electronic searches in the BIREME virtual bank, Virtual Health Library (VHL) and Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System Online (MEDLINE/PubMed) databases. SELECTION OF STUDIES:  For sample selection, articles that met the proposed objectives were included, published in English, Spanish and Portuguese, the use of Health Sciences Descriptors (DeCS): autistic OR autism AND autism spectrum disorder AND folic acid, AND, with the use of the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH): autistic OR autism AND autistic spectrum disorder AND folic acid. DATA COLLECTION:  Data extraction was performed by the reviewers with a preestablished data collection formulary. DATA SYNTHESIS:  The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Protocols (PRISMA-P) was used based on a checklist with 27 items and a 4-step flowchart. RESULTS:  A total of 384 articles was found by the search strategies, of which 17 were eligible following the pre-established criteria. The main findings of the present review point to maternal FA supplementation in the pre-conception period and beginning of pregnancy as a protective effect in relation to ASD, which should be indicated in this period as prevention to the problem. CONCLUSION:  According to the research analyzed, more studies are necessary to know its effects on pregnancy, since the consumption of excessive FA may not be innocuous.
34783992|a|If neurotypical people rely on specialized perceptual mechanisms when perceiving biological motion, then one would not expect an association between task performance and IQ. However, if those with ASD recruit higher order cognitive skills when solving biological motion tasks, performance may be predicted by IQ. In a meta-analysis that included 19 articles, we found an association between biological motion perception and IQ among observers with ASD but no significant relationship among typical observers. If the task required emotion perception, then there was an even stronger association with IQ in the ASD group.
34783991|a|In the last decade, there has been an increase in publications on technology-based interventions for autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Virtual reality based assessments and intervention tools are promising and have shown to be acceptable amongst individuals with ASD. This scoping review reports on 49 studies utilizing virtual reality and augmented reality technology in social skills interventions for individuals with ASD. The included studies mostly targeted children and adolescents, but few targeted very young children or adults. Our findings show that the mode number of participants with ASD is low, and that female participants are underrepresented. Our review suggests that there is need for studies that apply virtual and augmented realty with more rigorous designs involving established and evidenced-based intervention strategies.
34783777|a|Autism is a developmental disorder that has significant consequences on the future of the individuals concerned. Officially described for the first time in the 1940's, the disorder knew conceptual oscillations, but increasingly it is considered a sort of spectrum or continuum characterized mainly by a difficulty in social communication. In this article we will show how two very different clinical types of the autistic spectrum, i.e. the clinical descriptions of Kanner and Asperger's, owe much to the role played by the Viennese psychiatrist Georg Frankl who worked with both clinicians. Frankl's role would not only have been that a sort of channel of communication between Kanner and Asperger, but it would have been Frankl who influenced both psychiatrists in a decisive way.
34783001|a|Vitamin A deficiency and xerophthalmia is a rare finding in developed countries. We report a severe case of xerophthalmia in a 7-year-old autistic child with restricted diet. Both eyes had Bitot's spots and ulceration. The right cornea had a perforation at admission. After treatment with high doses of vitamin A the right cornea epithelialized with formation of the anterior chamber and the left eye healed completely. This case adds to the increasing number of reports on cases of xerophthalmia particularly in autistic children and highlights the importance of considering vitamin A deficiency in patients with risk of malnutrition also in developed countries.
34782850|a|Background: Autism is a neurodevelopmental problem that is increasing at an alarming rate worldwide. Rearing and caring for children with autism depends upon the perception of mothers and various factors associated with it. There is a gap in the literature regarding the detailed accounts of mother's experiences regarding autism in Nepal. Hence, this study was undertaken to explore lived experiences of mothers raising children with autism. Materials and Methods: Qualitative phenomenological study design was used and nine mothers with autistic children were selected using purposive sampling technique. Data were collected using in-depth interview guidelines and analyzed using Colaizzi's steps. Results: Findings of the study revealed that mothers raising children with autism encountered numerous problems in their life. They felt physically exhausted due to the continuous supervision of their child. Emotional problems such as denial, upset/sadness, and worry were also common among them. In addition, all mothers faced social problems such as social blame, social isolation, and ignorance from their relatives and society due to the atypical behavior of their child. Furthermore, the economic problem was also acute among mothers due to job loss, costly medical treatment, and therapies. So, to deal with the stressors they faced, mothers adopted various coping strategies such as respite care, problem-focused strategies, religious coping, and positive coping in their everyday life. Conclusion: In conclusion, to the authors' knowledge, this is the first study documenting the experiences of Nepalese mothers having autistic children. Hence, health care professionals need to pay more attention to address the problems of mothers while treating their autistic children. The Government of Nepal also needs to formulate a policy for the rehabilitation of autistic children in society.
34782849|a|
34782621|a|ASH1L, a histone methyltransferase, is identified as a top-ranking risk factor for autism spectrum disorder (ASD), however, little is known about the biological mechanisms underlying the link of ASH1L haploinsufficiency to ASD. Here we show that ASH1L expression and H3K4me3 level are significantly decreased in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) of postmortem tissues from ASD patients. Knockdown of Ash1L in PFC of juvenile mice induces the downregulation of risk genes associated with ASD, intellectual disability (ID) and epilepsy. These downregulated genes are enriched in excitatory and inhibitory synaptic function and have decreased H3K4me3 occupancy at their promoters. Furthermore, Ash1L deficiency in PFC causes the diminished GABAergic inhibition, enhanced glutamatergic transmission, and elevated PFC pyramidal neuronal excitability, which is associated with severe seizures and early mortality. Chemogenetic inhibition of PFC pyramidal neuronal activity, combined with the administration of GABA enhancer diazepam, rescues PFC synaptic imbalance and seizures, but not autistic social deficits or anxiety-like behaviors. These results have revealed the critical role of ASH1L in regulating synaptic gene expression and seizures, which provides insights into treatment strategies for ASH1L-associated brain diseases.
34782467|a|Nondegradative ubiquitin chains attached to specific targets via Lysine 63 (K63) residues have emerged to play a fundamental role in synaptic function. The K63-specific deubiquitinase CYLD has been widely studied in immune cells and lately also in neurons. To better understand if CYLD plays a role in brain and synapse homeostasis, we analyzed the behavioral profile of CYLD-deficient mice. We found that the loss of CYLD results in major autism-like phenotypes including impaired social communication, increased repetitive behavior, and cognitive dysfunction. Furthermore, the absence of CYLD leads to a reduction in hippocampal network excitability, long-term potentiation, and pyramidal neuron spine numbers. By providing evidence that CYLD can modulate mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling and autophagy at the synapse, we propose that synaptic K63-linked ubiquitination processes could be fundamental in understanding the pathomechanisms underlying autism spectrum disorder.
34782199|a|BACKGROUND: Developmental disorders associated with Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD), possibly resulting from a lack of dystrophin in the brain, have been reported, but their importance is not fully understood. We report a case of a BMD patient who had been socially withdrawn due to mental retardation and autism spectrum disorder and could not receive appropriate medical services, resulting in delayed detection of severe cardiomyopathy and embolic strokes which developed as complications of BMD. CASE REPORT: The case is a 41-year-old male. In elementary school, he was the slowest runner in his class and had poor grades. He started missing school due to bullying in junior high school and had been socially withdrawn for 24 years. He developed difficulty walking due to progressive muscle weakness in the extremities and lost ambulation at age 36. At age 41, he was referred to our hospital by public health support services to address his social withdrawal. Muscle biopsy led to the diagnosis of BMD. Psychological examination revealed mild mental retardation and autism spectrum disorder, which may have resulted in social isolation. He had severe cardiomyopathy and asymptomatic cerebral infarction due to heart failure. CONCLUSION: In BMD patients, developmental disorders can potentially hinder access to appropriate medical treatment. BMD is an important differential diagnosis for physically disabled children with developmental disorders. Early intellectual and psychological interventions and evaluation of complications are important for improving patient prognosis and quality of life.
34782156|a|OBJECTIVE: This study explored the related factors of FQOL in parents of children with ASD and examined whether social support mediates the relationship between parental self-efficacy and FQOL in parents of children with ASD. DESIGN AND METHODS: Using a cross-sectional design, a total of 260 parents of children with ASD were recruited from September 2019 to November 2020. They completed the Beach Center Family Quality of Life Scale, the Parenting Sense of Competence Scale, and the Social Support Rating Scale. RESULTS: Parental self-efficacy and social support explained approximately 49.5% of the variance in FQOL. After controlling for the confounding influence of parents' education level, parental self-efficacy had a direct effect on FQOL (beta = 0.292, SE = 0.108, P < 0.01) and an indirect effect on FQOL (beta = 0.165, SE = 0.069, P < 0.01). Effects were mediated through social support, with partial mediating effects accounting for 36.11% of the total effect. CONCLUSIONS: Both parental self-efficacy and social support are critical to promoting FQOL, and a partial mediating effect of social support was established. PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS: Interventions for families with children with ASD should focus on enhancing parental self-efficacy, followed by a perceived social support and FQOL prompt.
34781785|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Autism is the most common neurodevelopmental disorder in children worldwide. Genetic factors play an important role in the risk of developing autism. Determining the genetic cause of autism is key to understanding the biological processes that lead to the clinical manifestations of autism, and can inform the management and even prevention of this condition. Establishing genetic causes of autism requires collection of genetic data on a global scale. Limited research on genetic testing for individuals with autism is available from developing countries in low-resource regions. In this study, we explored the types of investigations ordered for Jordanian children with autism by their physicians. A representative sample of parents of children with autism in Jordan was questioned about the studies that their children received. We found that the recommended genetic testing was only performed in a small number of children with autism. In contrast, most children in the sample received non-genetic testing, which is not routinely recommended. We also explored the sociocultural factors that may influence the decision to perform genetic testing in this population. We discuss our findings in light of the data available from other developing and developed countries.
34781357|a|IMPORTANCE: Understanding occupational therapy practice patterns for adolescents who have autism spectrum disorder (ASD) provides a baseline to determine areas of need and effective interventions. OBJECTIVE: To identify puberty-related challenges addressed and interventions used by occupational therapy practitioners with adolescents ages 8-16 yr with ASD. DESIGN: A nonexperimental survey design with a stratified random sample was used. SETTING: The Occupational Therapy-Autism and Puberty Survey was distributed in the United States online through the Qualtrics platform (available October 2017-January 2018). PARTICIPANTS: Occupational therapists (89%) or occupational therapy assistants with experience with adolescents who have ASD were included. The 71 eligible respondents were primarily White women with an average 16 yr of experience. Outcomes and Measures: Nine key challenges and 11 interventions regarding puberty and ASD were identified. Hypotheses were generated before data collection. RESULTS: More practitioners (>47%) addressed emotional regulation and personal hygiene, and fewer (<26%) addressed menstruation, safety, and masturbation. Nearly all practitioners (>92%) reported using social learning approaches and behavioral strategies, and most (>80%) reporting having received education in these interventions. Significant differences were found between reported education and use of behavioral skills training incorporating applied behavioral analysis (p < .001), parent training (p = .002), and technology (p = .003). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Practitioners are neglecting to address puberty-specific challenges with adolescents who have ASD. Opportunities exist to expand the interventions used and challenges addressed by occupational therapy practitioners for adolescents with ASD. What This Article Adds: This article expands occupational therapy literature by giving a baseline understanding of the puberty-related challenges that practitioners are addressing with adolescents who have ASD. This information can assist the profession in developing effective interventions and educational opportunities to allow practitioners to successfully address puberty-specific challenges.
34781353|a|The neurodiversity movement presents a significant opportunity for occupational therapy practitioners to meet the needs of neurodivergent people across the life course The term neurodiverse includes autistic people and people with intellectual disabilities, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and several other mental health conditions. Research shows that neurodivergent people continue to need occupational therapy beyond the end of high school, when most supports and services end for them. Despite research showing that the needs of neurodiverse populations continue throughout the life course, research also shows that services for this population seem to taper as they progress through the public school system. The studies in this issue add to the body of literature supporting the role of occupational therapy practitioners in meeting the needs of neurodiverse people for services and supports through all stages of life.
34781351|a|IMPORTANCE: People with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD) express a clear interest in intimate relationships but face many barriers to receiving sex education (SE) that would support their engagement in these relationships. OBJECTIVE: To understand barriers to, the context of, and recommendations for SE for people with IDD. DESIGN: Qualitative study design with interviews and focus groups with four key stakeholder groups. Data were analyzed using a constant comparative approach. PARTICIPANTS: Participants were 8 youths with IDD, 9 parents, 12 health care providers, and 8 educators. RESULTS: Four barriers to SE were identified: (1) values and cultural issues, (2) parental attitudes toward their child's sexuality, (3) a lack of organizational policies and standards, and (4) limited professional education or societal biases. These barriers contribute to a SE context primarily initiated by people with IDD or provided reactively. The participants recommended proactive, formal SE provided by multiple stakeholders throughout adulthood. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Stakeholders should advocate for policies, standards, and additional training for parents, educators, and health care providers to support SE for people with IDD throughout adulthood. What This Article Adds: Barriers to SE contribute to the current context in which SE is shared with people with IDD. Stakeholders can advocate for policies, standards, and training to overcome these barriers and support recommendations for proactive, formal SE provided by multiple stakeholders through adulthood.
34781349|a|IMPORTANCE: Occupational therapy practitioners should use evidence-based practices, such as video modeling, to address work occupations supporting people with autism spectrum disorder, including those with co-occurring intellectual and developmental disabilities. OBJECTIVE: To examine the evidence and relevance of video modeling supporting engagement in work occupations for people with autism and to translate these findings to occupational therapy practice. DATA SOURCES: Cochrane Collection Plus, CINAHL, PubMed, ERIC, ProQuest, and peer-reviewed occupational therapy literature from 2008 to 2018. Study Selection and Data Collection: This review followed Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines. Study selection and data collection focused on occupational therapy scope of practice, autism spectrum disorder, co-occurring intellectual and developmental disabilities, video modeling, and work occupations for people age 16 yr and older. FINDINGS: A total of 464 articles were screened. Six articles met inclusion criteria. Results indicated moderate evidence for video modeling to support work occupations for people with autism, specifically employment seeking and acquisition and specific job-performance skills. Samples were limited to people younger than age 28 yr and represented varied intellectual abilities, indicating potential for benefits across the spectrum of cognitive functioning. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This systematic review highlights the promising potential of video modeling to address work occupations for people with autism. However, more rigorous effectiveness research is needed, including studies by occupational therapy practitioners. What This Article Adds: Occupational therapy expertise paired with video modeling, as a strengths-based, client-centered, customizable, socially acceptable intervention, can provide meaningful support for work occupations.
34781348|a|IMPORTANCE: Parents play an essential role in the transition to adulthood for autistic youth, yet often feel they do not have adequate training and resources. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate data on the preliminary efficacy of and collect participant feedback about the Maximizing Adolescent Post-Secondary Success (MAPSS) intervention. DESIGN: Single-group, pretest-posttest pilot study. SETTING: Clinic. PARTICIPANTS: Twenty-two families of autistic youth (ages 13-19 yr, 72.7% male). INTERVENTION: MAPSS is a group intervention for parent-youth dyads that is designed to guide parents in facilitating the development of independent skills for adulthood. Outcomes and Measures: Measures included the Transition Preparation Activities Measure (T-PAM), Family Empowerment Scale (FES), 10-item Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-10), Adulthood Expectations Questionnaire (AEQ), Adaptive Behavior Assessment System-Third Edition (ABAS-3), and a study-specific participant feedback survey. RESULTS: Frequency of transition preparation activities (T-PAM) significantly increased from before to after the intervention, and although the frequency of preparation activities decreased by 1-mo follow-up, it remained significantly higher than at baseline. Parent self-efficacy (FES), parent expectations (AEQ), and parent sense of control over outcomes (AEQ) also significantly increased from preintervention to follow-up; however, parent coping (PSS-10) was unchanged. Youth self-care skills (ABAS-3) demonstrated improvements 6 mo after the completion of the intervention, although other areas of adaptive behavior did not significantly change. Feedback from parents suggested they had positive experiences and felt the intervention was beneficial. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Our data suggest that the MAPSS intervention is an appropriate candidate for larger, controlled clinical trials. What This Article Adds: With additional evidence, this intervention can offer guidelines for occupational therapists to work with autistic youth and their parents to prepare for adulthood.
34781345|a|IMPORTANCE: In the transition to adulthood, driving supports independence. For autistic adolescents, training provided by specialized driving instructors, including occupational therapists, may establish fitness to drive and continued independence. OBJECTIVE: To examine specialized driving instructors' experiences providing behind-the-wheel instruction to autistic adolescents. DESIGN: We recruited participants through purposive and snowball sampling of members of ADED, the Association for Driver Rehabilitation Specialists. Interviews investigated experiences providing instruction, autistic students' strengths and challenges, strategies used, and recommendations to improve the learning-to-drive process. We coded transcripts using a directed content analysis approach. SETTING: Telephone interviews. PARTICIPANTS: Specialized driving instructors (N = 17) trained as occupational therapists, driver rehabilitation specialists, or licensed driving instructors with recent experience providing behind-the-wheel training for autistic adolescents participated. RESULTS: Behind-the-wheel challenges included mental inflexibility, distractibility, and difficulties with social cues and motor coordination. Instructors acknowledged students' strengths, including adherence to rules of the road, limited risk taking, and careful observations. Instructors scaffolded learning to help students develop skills. Although licensure and driving outcomes were sometimes unknown to instructors, students who became licensed frequently drove with supervision or restrictions. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Licensure is possible for autistic adolescents, although developing fitness to drive requires individualization and rigorous specialized instruction, which may culminate in delayed or restricted driving. What This Article Adds: This article highlights challenges and strengths encountered by specialized driving instructors teaching autistic adolescents. Despite requiring prolonged training, autistic adolescents can achieve licensure when supported by specialized instruction that is individualized to their needs and strengths.
34781339|a|IMPORTANCE: Quality of life (QoL) is a core outcome of occupational therapy, but it is decreased among autistic adolescents and adults. This is the first review of QoL from an occupational therapy standpoint. OBJECTIVE: To identify self-reported QoL differences between autistic and nonautistic samples; investigate sex differences in QoL among autistic people; examine consistency in QoL among autistic people across age, intellectual disability (ID), and self- versus proxy-report method; and appraise occupational therapy-related interventions addressing QoL among autistic people. DATA SOURCES: Articles published in peer-reviewed journals between 2010 and 2020, located through Academic Search Ultimate, PubMed, and OTseeker, along with the American Journal of Occupational Therapy, British Journal of Occupational Therapy, Canadian Journal of Occupational Therapy, and Australian Occupational Therapy Journal. Study Selection and Data Collection: Article samples consisted of at least 20% autistic females and used self-reported QoL measures. Qualitative research was excluded, as well as studies with participants younger than age 13 yr. Twenty-seven articles qualified (3 Level 1B, 13 Level 3B, and 11 Level 4). FINDINGS: Autistic adolescents and adults demonstrated decreased self-reported QoL compared with nonautistic peers across age and ID presence. One article compared sex differences in QoL among autistic people. Interventions improved QoL among autistic people. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Autistic adolescents and adults demonstrate decreased QoL in comparison with nonautistic peers. Questions remain related to sex differences in QoL among autistic people, an area for future research. Multiple evidence-based approaches to improve QoL in the autistic population are relevant to occupational therapy practice. What This Article Adds: Self-reported QoL among autistic adolescents and adults is clearly lower than among their nonautistic counterparts. This article provides information on multiple interventions related to occupational therapy to improve QoL among autistic people.
34781058|a|Epidemiologic evidence has suggested a relationship between di (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) prenatal exposure and autism spectrum disorders (ASD), but the underlying mechanisms are still at large unknown. In this study, pregnant mice were intragastrically administered with DEHP once a day from GD 3 to GD 17 and the neurobehavioral changes of offspring were evaluated. In addition to the repetitive stereotyped behaviors, DEHP at the concentration of 50 mg/kg/day and above significantly impaired the sociability of the offspring (P < 0.05) and decreased the density of dendritic spines of pyramidal neurons in the prefrontal cortex (P < 0.05). At the same time, the expression of Nischarin protein in prefrontal lobe increased (P < 0.05). Similarly, after 12-h incubation of DEHP at the concentration of 100 nM, the total spine density, especially the mushroom and stubby spine populations, significantly decreased in the primary cultured prefrontal cortical neurons (P < 0.05). However, the inhibitory effect of DEHP were reversed by knockdown of Nischarin expression. Collectively, these results suggest that prenatal DEHP exposure induces Nischarin expression, causes dendritic spine loss, and finally leads to autism-like behavior in mouse offspring.
34781002|a|Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is a new and adequate route to modify the microbial ecosystem in gastrointestinal tract of the hosts. Intestinal microbiota is highly associated with human health and disease. According to the reports of human clinical trials or case series, the application of FMT ranged from Clostridiodes difficile infection (CDI), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), irritable bowel syndrome, refractory diarrhea, diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome, and even neurologic diseases, including Parkinson disease, and neuropsychiatric disorder (autism spectrum disorder, ASD). Although the current allowed indication of FMT is CDI in Taiwan, more application and development are expectable in the future. There is a relative rare data available for children in application of fecal microbiota transplantation. Thus, we review previous published research inspecting FMT in children, and address particular considerations when conducting FMT in pediatric patients.
34780987|a|OBJECTIVE: Pre-pregnancy obesity has been linked to childhood neurodevelopmental outcomes, including autism and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. The aim of our study was to examine the association between pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI) and scores on behavioral scales according to both mother and teacher report. METHODS: We conducted a longitudinal study of 469 mother-child pairs. Information on pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI) was collected from standardized maternal interviews conducted after delivery and assessment of childhood behavioral problems was measured at 5-12 years of age according to maternal-report using the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL) and teacher-report using the Teacher Report Form (TRF). Using normal pre-pregnancy BMI (18.5-24.9 kg/m2) as the reference (n = 305), we calculated adjusted mean differences (MD) for t-scores on broadband and syndrome scales of behavior for children of mothers with pre-pregnancy overweight (n = 101) or obese (n = 63) BMI. We also examined associations with scores in the clinical range using risk ratios (RR) and compared results across informants. To account for loss to follow-up between the initial interview and the childhood behavioral assessment, we weighted models using stabilized inverse probability weights. RESULTS: Pre-pregnancy obesity was associated with a mean increase in child's total behavior problem t-scores according to both mother and teacher report, after adjustment for confounders and weighted for loss to follow-up (MD: 0.7, 95% CI: -2.2, 3.6 on CBCL; MD: 3.1, 95% CI: 0.5, 5.7 on TRF), indicating poorer behavioral outcomes. Comparing the magnitude of associations between mother and teacher-report, mean differences for pre-pregnancy obesity and most behavioral problem scales were larger for teacher-reported outcomes than mother-reported outcomes. Pre-pregnancy obesity was associated with increased risks of externalizing behaviors in the clinical range regardless of informant (CBCL RR: 1.6, 95% CI: 0.8, 3.2 and TRF RR: 1.7, 95% CI: 0.8, 3.5). Pre-pregnancy obesity was also associated with increased risks of internalizing behaviors according to teacher-report (TRF RR: 2.6, 95% CI:1.5, 4.6). CONCLUSIONS: Pre-pregnancy obesity, compared to pre-pregnancy normal weight, is associated with generally higher scores on both mother and teacher reported childhood behavioral assessments, indicating an increased likelihood of behavioral problems.
34780921|a|Microglia serve as resident immune cells in the brain, responding to insults and pathological developments. They have also been implicated in shaping synaptic development and regulation. The present study examined microglial cell density in a number of brain regions across select postnatal (P) ages along with the effects of valproic acid (VPA) on microglia density. Specifically, C57BL/6JCx3CR1+/GFP mice were examined for microglial cell number changes on P7, P14, P30, and P60 under baseline conditions and following 400 mg/kg VPA or saline. The prefrontal cortex (PFC), hippocampus and cerebellum were observed. Under control conditions, the results showed a shift in the number of microglia in these brain areas throughout development with a peak density in the hippocampus at P14 and an increase in PFC microglial numbers from P15 to P30. Interestingly, VPA treatment enhanced microglial numbers in a region-specific manner. VPA at P7 increased microglial cell number in the hippocampus and cerebellum whereas P14 VPA treatment altered microglial density in the cerebellum only. Cerebellar increases also occurred after VPA at P30, and were attended by an effect of increased numbers in the PFC. Finally, animals treated with VPA at P60 exhibited decreased microglia density in the hippocampus only. These results suggest rapid VPA-induced increases in microglial cell density in a developmentally-regulated fashion which differs across distinct brain areas. Furthermore, in the context of prior reports that early VPA causes excitotoxic damage, the present findings suggest early VPA exposure may provide a model for studying altered microglial responses to early toxicant challenge.
34780749|a|Monoamine oxidase B (MAO B) oxidizes trace amine phenylethylamine (PEA), and neurotransmitters serotonin and dopamine in the brain. We reported previously that PEA levels increased significantly in all brain regions, but serotonin and dopamine levels were unchanged in MAO B knockout (KO) mice. PEA and dopamine are both synthesized from phenylalanine by aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase in dopaminergic neurons in the striatum. A high concentration of PEA in the striatum may cause dopaminergic neuronal death in the absence of MAO B. We isolated the RNA from brain tissue of MAO B KO mice (2-month old) and age-matched wild type (WT) male mice and analyzed the altered genes by Affymetrix microarray. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in MAO B KO compared to WT mice were analyzed by Partek Genomics Suite, followed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) to assess their functional relationships. DEGs in MAO B KO mice are involved in brain inflammation and the genesis of GABAnergic neurons. The significant DEGs include four brain injury or inflammation genes (upregulated: Ido1, TSPO, AVP, Tdo2), five gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors (down-regulated: GABRA2, GABRA3, GABRB1, GABRB3, GABRG3), five transcription factors related to adult neurogenesis (upregulated: Wnt7b, Hes5; down-regulated: Pax6, Tcf4, Dtna). Altered brain injury and inflammation genes in MAO B knockout mice are involved in various neurological disorders: attention deficit hyperactive disorder, panic disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, autism, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson's diseases, Alzheimer's disease, bipolar affective disorder. Many were commonly involved in these disorders, indicating that there are overlapping molecular pathways.
34780642|a|IMPORTANCE: Motor vehicle accidents are the leading cause of unintentional deaths of children ages 1 and older, particularly children with health care needs. OBJECTIVE: To explore family caregivers' experiences and current practices while transporting children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). DESIGN: A concurrent nested mixed-methods approach was used to gain insight into caregiver experiences. SETTING: Participants completed an online Qualtrics survey. PARTICIPANTS: A convenience sample of 54 caregivers of children with ASD from 17 U.S. states. RESULTS: Themes that emerged include sensory behaviors of children, education related to child passenger safety, and participation in the community. Statistically significant findings suggest a correlation between caregivers (n = 39) being less likely to participate in activities away from home if the child had attempted to elope (p = .013), displayed aggressive behaviors (p = .005), or demonstrated self-injurious behaviors (p = .001). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The findings suggest a correlation between caregivers limiting the distance traveled during vehicular transportation and behavioral safety concerns. If caregivers must limit travel, they may refrain from accessing the community and engaging in leisure pursuits. What This Article Adds: The findings suggest that therapists who treat children with ASD should be familiar with child passenger safety restraints, particularly for elopement.
34780630|a|IMPORTANCE: Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) may experience sleep difficulties that worsen into adulthood and negatively influence both child and family, yet the experience is not well understood. Understanding the family's experience can inform occupational therapy providers, future research, and practice guidelines. OBJECTIVE: To examine experiences surrounding sleep for families raising a young adult with ASD (YA-ASD). DESIGN: Qualitative study in the phenomenological tradition of Moustakas (1994). Experienced researchers analyzed transcripts from in-depth, in-person interviews to triangulate data, distill themes, and construct the essence of family experience. Trustworthiness was established through member checking, audit trails, and epoche diaries that were maintained throughout data analyses. SETTING: Community setting (large city in the northeastern United States). PARTICIPANTS: People who self-identified as living in a family arrangement that included a YA-ASD age 15-21 yr, able to verbally participate in English. Families with children diagnosed with developmental disabilities other than ASD were excluded. RESULTS: Six eligible families identified through volunteer sampling participated. The participants' sociodemographic diversity was limited across household income, education level, and ethnicity. All YA-ASD in this study were limited verbally and unable to contribute. Analyses of interview transcripts revealed five themes that form the essence of the families' experience surrounding sleep. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Sleep issues for YA-ASD continue into adulthood and affect the entire family because of continuous co-occupation; occupational therapy support is therefore important for families of YA-ASD. The lack of effective evidence-based interventions supporting the YA-ASD population also reveals an area for growth. What This Article Adds: The results indicate the importance of addressing sleep for YA-ASD and their families in occupational therapy practice because of its considerable impact on family life.
34779992|a|We conducted a systematic review to identify randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and single case research design (SCRD) studies of children with autism spectrum disorder that evaluate the effectiveness of responsivity intervention techniques for improving prelinguistic and/or language outcomes. Mean effect sizes were moderate and large for RCTs (33 studies; g = 0.36, 95% CI [0.21, 0.51]) and SCRD (34 studies; between-case standardized mean difference = 1.20, 95% CI [0.87, 1.54]) studies, respectively. Visual analysis (37 studies) revealed strong evidence of a functional relation for 45% of the opportunities and no evidence for 53%. Analyses of moderator effects and study quality are presented. Findings provide support for responsivity intervention strategies with more robust support for context-bound outcomes than more generalized outcomes.
34779982|a|Asexuality is a lack of sexual attraction to any gender. There is some evidence to suggest that many self-identified asexuals have a formal diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder which is characterized by deficits in social interaction and communication, as well as by restricted and repetitive interests and behaviors. Additionally, the literature shows that asexuality and lack of sexual attraction or low sexual interest is overrepresented in people with autism spectrum disorder compared with neurotypical samples. Nevertheless, no studies have been conducted to investigate the relationship between autism and asexuality in depth. We conducted a systematic review of the literature to examine whether asexuality and autism spectrum disorder are connected. We conclude that asexuality and autism share various aspects, such as a possible role of prenatal factors, reference to romantic dimensions of sexual attraction and sexual orientation, and non-partner-oriented sexual desire, but future research should explore and clarify this link.
34779076|a|Although the molecular mechanisms underlying amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are not yet fully understood, several studies report alterations in tau phosphorylation in both sporadic and familial ALS. Recently, we have demonstrated that phosphorylated tau at S396 (pTau-S396) is mislocalized to synapses in ALS motor cortex (mCTX) and contributes to mitochondrial dysfunction. Here, we demonstrate that while there was no overall increase in total tau, pTau-S396, and pTau-S404 in ALS post-mortem mCTX, total tau and pTau-S396 were increased in C9ORF72-ALS. Additionally, there was a significant decrease in pTau-T181 in ALS mCTX compared controls. Furthermore, we leveraged the ALS Knowledge Portal and Project MinE data sets and identified ALS-specific genetic variants across MAPT, the gene encoding tau. Lastly, assessment of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples revealed a significant increase in total tau levels in bulbar-onset ALS together with a decrease in CSF pTau-T181:tau ratio in all ALS samples, as reported previously. While increases in CSF tau levels correlated with a faster disease progression as measured by the revised ALS functional rating scale (ALSFRS-R), decreases in CSF pTau-T181:tau ratio correlated with a slower disease progression, suggesting that CSF total tau and pTau-T181 ratio may serve as biomarkers of disease in ALS. Our findings highlight the potential role of pTau-T181 in ALS, as decreases in CSF pTau-T181:tau ratio may reflect the significant decrease in pTau-T181 in post-mortem mCTX. Taken together, these results indicate that tau phosphorylation is altered in ALS post-mortem mCTX as well as in CSF and, importantly, the newly described pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants identified in MAPT in this study are adjacent to T181 and S396 phosphorylation sites further highlighting the potential role of these tau functional domains in ALS.
34778490|a|Pitt Hopkins-like syndrome 1 (PTHLS1, OMIM # 610042) is an ultra-rare autosomal recessive condition with a prevalence of <1/1,000,000. Intragenic deletions of CNTNAP2 has been implicated in PTHLS1, however to our knowledge a compound heterozygous deletion of exon 4 and a c.1977_1989del13; p.V660Ffsx9 frameshift variant have not been published previously. In this case report, the proband is a seven year old female with PTHLS1, developmental delay, autism spectrum disorder, focal epilepsy, hypotonia, refractory errors, strabismus, and obstructive sleep apnea. Whole exome sequencing analysis revealed biallelic pathogenic variants of the CNTNAP2 gene. Proband has a three year old sister who has who has a similar phenotype including, developmental delay, epilepsy, gait abnormality, refractory errors, strabismus. Family variants were tested and she shared the same CNTNAP2 variants as her sister. The sisters described highlight two novel variants leading to PTHLS1. Genetic workup is essential in identification and management guidance in these populations.
34777730|a|Children with autism need appropriate educational toys to assist rehabilitation training, so as to inhibit the development of autism. Toys and related treatments for children with autism can alleviate some of the deficits of children with autism. By using toys as stimuli and various sensations obtained by children with autism or toys as a result of reinforcement, the improvement of certain capabilities expected by related therapies can be achieved through the process of stimulation and reinforcement. However, in the process of pediatrics toy development, it is difficult for toy designers to assess whether the purpose of stimulation and reinforcement can be achieved. There are many factors that affect the design of rehabilitation toys. The industry has not formed a unified design evaluation standard, and the effects of product rehabilitation training are uneven. A method based on the radial basis function (RBF) neural network was proposed in this research to study the rehabilitation design and evaluation of rehabilitation toys for children with autism. Firstly, according to the three demand indicators for the evaluation of rehabilitation training for children with autism, that is, "useful, educational, and entertaining," the analytic network process (ANP) method was chosen as the weighting method for determining each indicator in the overall evaluation. The RBF neural network rehabilitation model for children with autism was designed and evaluated. The maximum error of the model was less than 10%. The evaluation method was objective and reasonable, so as to provide a reference for the more accurate design evaluation, purchase, and development of rehabilitation toys for children with autism.
34777662|a|
34777512|a|Avoidant Restrictive Food Intake Disorder (ARFID) is a Feeding and Eating Disorder newly added to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5 th Edition, which presents with high prevalence rates in community and clinical settings. Given its recent diagnostic recognition, validated and standardized treatments for this population are lacking. In addition, given the complexity, heterogeneity of symptoms, and high rates of psychiatric comorbidities in the ARFID population, new models of care are required. The current therapy model combines two evidence-based treatments - Family Based Treatment (FBT) and the Unified Protocols for Transdiagnostic Treatment of Emotional Disorders in Children and Adolescents (UP-C/A) - for young patients with ARFID plus Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), which allows clinicians to personalize care based on each patient's unique presenting needs. This paper presents two distinct cases which showcase the use of the FBT+UP for ARFID approach for treating comorbid ARFID and ASD in a clinical setting. Case 1 demonstrates the application and reliance on FBT, while Case 2 draws upon UP to facilitate behavioural change in the patient. Case backgrounds, presenting problems, and treatment approaches combining the two evidence-based treatments are presented and discussed. The cases demonstrate the unique challenges of treating young patients with comorbid ARFID and ASD, along with the proposed benefits of the combined approach with this population.
34777059|a|University-affiliated lab and model schools play an important role in creating educational innovations in inclusive early childhood education (ECE) for young children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). In the United States, access to inclusive high-quality ECE programs for young children with disabilities has been required by law for over 40 years, has been recommended by leading professional organizations, and has been emphasized in federal public policy initiatives. Yet, improvement in the rates of young children with disabilities experiencing inclusion has been limited. This review article consists of three parts. First, we identify and describe four barriers to wide-scale implementation of inclusive ECE programs for children with ASD in the US. These barriers include (1) the fragmented nature of the ECE system in the United States, (2) the age at which ASD is typically first diagnosed in the community, (3) the diverse presentation/support needs of children with ASD, and (4) the thoughts and feelings of parents of children without disability about inclusion. Second, we used a snowball sampling approach to identify nine leading university-affiliated, inclusive lab and model schools for young children with ASD. By describing these programs, we highlight similarities and differences between programs, and capture the unique ways in which these programs adapt to local conditions, resources, and barriers (e.g., federal and state regulations, funding sources, community resources, institutional structures and priorities, professional orientation and training, access to families and staff). Finally, we propose a roadmap for researchers focused on the development, evaluation, and implementation of community-viable inclusive ECE programs in ASD. This roadmap leverages synergies between inclusive university-affiliated lab and model preschools in ASD, and proposes the formation of a research network that creates an infrastructure for cross-program collaboration.
34777048|a|Objective: Individuals with autism spectrum disorder often present somatic and/or psychiatric co-morbid disorders. The DSM-5 allows for consideration of additional diagnoses besides ASD and may have impacted the prevalence of co-morbidities as well as being limited in capturing the true differences in prevalence observed between males and females. We describe the prevalence of ASD and frequently observed co-morbidities in children and adolescents (<18 years) in the United States and five European countries. Methods: Two systematic literature reviews were conducted in PubMed and Embase for the period 2014-2019 and focusing on the prevalence of ASD and nine co-morbidities of interest based on their frequency and/or severity: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), anxiety, depressive disorders, epilepsy, intellectual disability (ID), sleep disorders, sight/hearing impairment/loss, and gastro-intestinal syndromes (GI). Results: Thirteen studies on prevalence of ASD and 33 on prevalence of co-morbidities were included. Prevalence of ASD was 1.70 and 1.85% in US children aged 4 and 8 years respectively, while prevalence in Europe ranged between 0.38 and 1.55%. Additionally, current evidence is supportive of a global increase in ASD prevalence over the past years. Substantial heterogeneity in prevalence of co-morbidities was observed: ADHD (0.00-86.00%), anxiety (0.00-82.20%), depressive disorders (0.00-74.80%), epilepsy (2.80-77.50%), ID (0.00-91.70%), sleep disorders (2.08-72.50%), sight/hearing impairment/loss (0.00-14.90%/0.00-4.90%), and GI syndromes (0.00-67.80%). Studies were heterogeneous in terms of design and method to estimate prevalence. Gender appears to represent a risk factor for co-morbid ADHD (higher in males) and epilepsy/seizure (higher in females) while age is also associated with ADHD and anxiety (increasing until adolescence). Conclusion: Our results provide a descriptive review of the prevalence of ASD and its co-morbidities in children and adolescents. These insights can be valuable for clinicians and parents/guardians of autistic children. Prevalence of ASD has increased over time while co-morbidities bring additional heterogeneity to the clinical presentation, which further advocates for personalized approaches to treatment and support. Having a clear understanding of the prevalence of ASD and its co-morbidities is important to raise awareness among stakeholders.
34777033|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by social communication deficits and restricted interests and behaviors which begin very early in life. In about a quarter of cases, the symptoms emerge about 18-24 months after a period of normal development, a phenomenon commonly described as early regression. However, marked functional decline can also occur in persons with autism after a relatively stable childhood. As opposed to early regression, which occurs in normally developing children, late regression occurs typically in adolescents with an established diagnosis of autism. Apart from their occasional mention in the literature, these individuals have not been examined systematically. This Brief Report describes the presentation, comorbidity and short-term outcome of 20 persons with ASD who developed late regression. The mean age of onset of regression was 13 years. One of the earliest symptoms was an increase in obsessive slowing and compulsive rituals. Other symptoms included motor abnormalities, aggression and mood disturbance. The most common comorbid disorder was catatonia occurring in 17 patients. Despite treatment with several modalities, the outcome was often suboptimal. These findings suggest that catatonia is a common cause of late regression in persons with autism. Clinical and research implications are discussed.
34776864|a|Background: Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by hormonal dysregulation, obesity, intellectual disability, and behavioral problems. Most PWS cases are caused by paternal interstitial deletions of 15q11.2-q13.1, while a smaller number of cases are caused by chromosome 15 maternal uniparental disomy (PW-UPD). Children with PW-UPD are at higher risk for developing autism spectrum disorder (ASD) than the neurotypical population. In this study, we used expression analysis of PW-UPD neurons to try to identify the molecular cause for increased autism risk. Methods: Dental pulp stem cells (DPSC) from neurotypical control and PWS subjects were differentiated to neurons for mRNA sequencing. Significantly differentially expressed transcripts among all groups were identified. Downstream protein analysis including immunocytochemistry and immunoblots were performed to confirm the transcript level data and pathway enrichment findings. Results: We identified 9 transcripts outside of the PWS critical region (15q11.2-q13.1) that may contribute to core PWS phenotypes. Moreover, we discovered a global reduction in mitochondrial transcripts in the PW-UPD + ASD group. We also found decreased mitochondrial abundance along with mitochondrial aggregates in the cell body and neural projections of +ASD neurons. Conclusion: The 9 transcripts we identified common to all PWS subtypes may reveal PWS specific defects during neurodevelopment. Importantly, we found a global reduction in mitochondrial transcripts in PW-UPD + ASD neurons versus control and other PWS subtypes. We then confirmed mitochondrial defects in neurons from individuals with PWS at the cellular level. Quantification of this phenotype supports our hypothesis that the increased incidence of ASD in PW-UPD subjects may arise from mitochondrial defects in developing neurons.
34776852|a|SH3 and Multiple Ankyrin Repeat Domains 3 (SHANK3)-caused autism spectrum disorder (ASD) may present a unique opportunity to clarify the heterogeneous neuropathological mechanisms of ASD. However, the specificity and commonality of disrupted large-scale brain organization in SHANK3-deficient children remain largely unknown. The present study combined genetic tests, neurobehavioral evaluations, and magnetic resonance imaging, aiming to explore the disruptions of both local and networked cortical structural organization in ASD children with and without SHANK3 deficiency. Multiple surface morphological parameters such as cortical thickness (CT) and sulcus depth were estimated, and the graph theory was adopted to characterize the topological properties of structural covariance networks (SCNs). Finally, a correlation analysis between the alterations in brain morphological features and the neurobehavioral evaluations was performed. Compared with typically developed children, increased CT and reduced nodal degree were found in both ASD children with and without SHANK3 defects mainly in the lateral temporal cortex, prefrontal cortex (PFC), temporo-parietal junction (TPJ), superior temporal gyrus (STG), and limbic/paralimbic regions. Besides commonality, our findings showed some distinct abnormalities in ASD children with SHANK3 defects compared to those without. Locally, more changes in the STG and orbitofrontal cortex were exhibited in ASD children with SHANK3 defects, while more changes in the TPJ and inferior parietal lobe (IPL) in those without SHANK3 defects were observed. For the SCNs, a trend toward regular network topology was observed in ASD children with SHANK3 defects, but not in those without. In addition, ASD children with SHANK3 defects showed more alterations of nodal degrees in the anterior and posterior cingulate cortices and right insular, while there were more disruptions in the sensorimotor areas and the left insular and dorsomedial PFC in ASD without SHANK3 defects. Our findings indicate dissociable disruptions of local and networked brain morphological features in ASD children with and without SHANK3 deficiency. Moreover, this monogenic study may provide a valuable path for parsing the heterogeneity of brain disturbances in ASD.
34776851|a|The endocannabinoid system (ECS) is an important brain modulatory network. ECS regulates brain homeostasis throughout development, from progenitor fate decision to neuro- and gliogenesis, synaptogenesis, brain plasticity and circuit repair, up to learning, memory, fear, protection, and death. It is a major player in the hypothalamic-peripheral system-adipose tissue in the regulation of food intake, energy storage, nutritional status, and adipose tissue mass, consequently affecting obesity. Loss of ECS control might affect mood disorders (anxiety, hyperactivity, psychosis, and depression), lead to drug abuse, and impact neurodegenerative (Alzheimer's, Parkinson, Huntington, Multiple, and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis) and neurodevelopmental (autism spectrum) disorders. Practice of regular physical and/or mind-body mindfulness and meditative activities have been shown to modulate endocannabinoid (eCB) levels, in addition to other players as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). ECS is involved in pain, inflammation, metabolic and cardiovascular dysfunctions, general immune responses (asthma, allergy, and arthritis) and tumor expansion, both/either in the brain and/or in the periphery. The reason for such a vast impact is the fact that arachidonic acid, a precursor of eCBs, is present in every membrane cell of the body and on demand eCBs synthesis is regulated by electrical activity and calcium shifts. Novel lipid (lipoxins and resolvins) or peptide (hemopressin) players of the ECS also operate as regulators of physiological allostasis. Indeed, the presence of cannabinoid receptors in intracellular organelles as mitochondria or lysosomes, or in nuclear targets as PPARgamma might impact energy consumption, metabolism and cell death. To live a better life implies in a vigilant ECS, through healthy diet selection (based on a balanced omega-3 and -6 polyunsaturated fatty acids), weekly exercises and meditation therapy, all of which regulating eCBs levels, surrounded by a constructive social network. Cannabidiol, a diet supplement has been a major player with anti-inflammatory, anxiolytic, antidepressant, and antioxidant activities. Cognitive challenges and emotional intelligence might strengthen the ECS, which is built on a variety of synapses that modify human behavior. As therapeutically concerned, the ECS is essential for maintaining homeostasis and cannabinoids are promising tools to control innumerous targets.
34776843|a|Introduction: Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by a complex pathogenesis, by impairment social communication and interaction, and may also manifest repetitive patterns of behavior. Many studies have recognized an alteration of the immune response as a major etiological component in ASDs. Despite this, it is still unclear the variation of the function of the immune response. Aim: Our aim is to investigate the levels of immunological markers in peripheral blood of children with ASD such as: regulatory B and T cells, memory B and natural killer (NK) cells. Materials and Methods: We assessed various subsets of immune cells in peripheral blood (regulatory B and T cells, B-cell memory and natural killer cells) by multi-parametric flow cytometric analysis in 26 ASD children compared to 16 healthy controls (HCs) who matched age and gender. Results: No significant difference was observed between B-cell memory and NK cells in ASDs and HCs. Instead, regulatory B cells and T cells were decreased (p < 0.05) in ASD subjects when compared to HCs. Discussion: Regulatory B and T cells have a strategic role in maintaining the immune homeostasis. Their functions have been associated with the development of multiple pathologies especially in autoimmune diseases. According to our study, the immunological imbalance of regulatory B and T cells may play a pivotal role in the evolution of the disease, as immune deficiencies could be related to the severity of the ongoing disorder.
34776508|a|Clinical relevance of genetic testing is increasing in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Information about genetic risk may contribute to improved diagnostics, treatment and family planning, but may also be perceived as a burden. Knowledge about the families' preferences with regard to genetic risk information is important for both health care professionals and policy makers. We investigated attitudes towards sharing information about genetic risk of ASD and knowledge about future health among parent members of the Norwegian Autism Association (N = 1455) using a questionnaire, and the relationships with parent and child characteristics, such as age, gender and ASD severity. Most preferred autonomy in deciding whom to inform about genetic risk of ASD (74.4%) and a minority supported extensive intra-familial disclosure of the genetic risk (41.1%). The majority agreed that it is an obligation to know as much as possible relevant for future health (58.0%) and only 51.7% agreed to a principle of a 'right not to know'. In regression models, the attitudes were associated with opinions about benefits and harms of genetic testing (e.g., treatment, family planning, understanding of ASD pathology, insurance discrimination and family conflict). In sum, the findings show that most parents want to know as much as possible relevant for their children's future health and keep their autonomy and intra-familial confidentiality about genetic risk information. Nearly half of the parents were not concerned with a "right not to know". These attitudes can inform development of guidelines and bioethics in the age of genomic precision medicine.
34776386|a|BACKGROUND: The dental treatment of individuals with intellectual disability can represent a considerable professional challenge. OBJECTIVE: To develop a model for predicting the behavior of patients with intellectual disability in the dental office. METHODS: The study group comprised 250 patients with Down syndrome (DS), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), cerebral palsy (CP), idiopathic cognitive impairment or rare disorders. We collected their demographic, medical, social and behavioral information and identified potential predictors (chi-squared test). We developed stratified models (Akaike information criterion) to anticipate the patients'behavior during intraoral examinations and to discern whether the dental treatment should be performed under general anesthesia. These models were validated in a new study group consisting of 80 patients. Goodness of fit was quantified with sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), negative predictive value (NPV) and area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC). We developed a mathematical algorithm for executing the models and developed software for its practical implementation (PREdictors of BEhavior in Dentistry, "PREBED"). RESULTS: For patients with DS, ASD and CP, the model predicting the need for physical restraint during examination achieved a PPV of 0.90, 0.85 and 1.00, respectively, and an NPV of 0.66, 0.76 and 1.00, respectively. The model predicting the need for performing treatment under general anesthesia achieved a PPV of 0.63, 1.00 and 1.00, respectively, and an NPV of 1.00, 1.00 and 0.73, respectively. However, when validating the stratified models, the percentage of poorly classified individuals (false negatives + false positives) ranged from 24% to 46.6%. CONCLUSIONS: The results of the PREBED tool open the door to establishing new models implementing other potentially predictive variables.
34776249|a|BACKGROUND: The Covid-19 pandemic had a strong impact on mental health in the general population. This study conducted during the first lockdown in France considered parents of children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) prospectively followed in the ELENA Cohort. OBJECTIVES: We aimed to (1) compare the Anxiety and Depression (AaD) levels during the lockdown between mothers and fathers, (2) compare the parent's AaD between the lockdown and the last ELENA follow-up visit, and (3) identify risk factors for parental AaD during lockdown among socio-demographic and children's clinical characteristics. METHODS: The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) was used to assess AaD in 134 parent's pairs. Parents also completed the Questionnaire about their living conditions during COVID-19, their child's interventions and perceived changes about their child's behaviors and sleep. Child's ASD severity, intellectual and socio-adaptive skills and parent's socio-demographic characteristics were collected from ELENA follow-up. RESULTS: The parents' AaD levels were lower during the lockdown compared to the last ELENA visit that coincided in 96% with the child's ASD diagnosis. The AaD levels were more pronounced in mothers and significantly associated with the child's challenging behaviors, parents' teleworking and perceived knowledge about COVID-19. The perception of an insufficient knowledge was the only risk factor for mothers' AaD. CONCLUSION: Our findings highlighted the pertinence for an assessment of the mental health of main caregivers of children with ASD, consideration of their gender characteristics, and the importance of providing relevant information during pandemic. Future studies examining the pandemic long-term effects are needed. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT02625116.
34775994|a|BACKGROUND: Anxiety is prevalent in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and can negatively impact physical and mental health. Self-awareness of anxiety signs is a key barrier to success of anxiety interventions for many children. METHODS: To address this, we conducted a randomized controlled trial to assess whether the Anxiety Meter, a wearable, real-time anxiety detection technology, can improve awareness of anxiety symptoms and the initiation of relaxation techniques in children with ASD. Twenty-eight children with ASD were trained on the use of the Anxiety Meter and taught a diaphragmatic breathing relaxation technique over three visits. On the fourth visit, participants were randomized to either receive feedback of their anxiety level or no feedback from the Anxiety Meter while completing a stress-eliciting task (public speaking) and asked to engage in deep breathing if anxious. RESULTS: Feedback from the Anxiety Meter was associated with increased likelihood of initiating deep breathing in response to anxiety. LIMITATIONS: Limitations include the small sample size, imbalanced group matching for IQ and sex, and the controlled-laboratory settings which limit the statistical power and generalizability of the results to real-world settings. CONCLUSIONS: Although these results are limited by the relatively small sample size, they support the feasibility of using a wearable device and real-time feedback to improve anxiety symptom awareness. Trial Registration ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02160691, registration date: 06/05/2014.
34775911|a|The gut-brain axis hypothesis suggests that interactions in the intestinal milieu are critically involved in regulating brain function. Several studies point to a gut-microbiota-brain connection linking an impaired intestinal barrier and altered gut microbiota composition to neurological disorders involving neuroinflammation. Increased gut permeability allows luminal antigens to cross the gut epithelium, and via the blood stream and an impaired blood-brain barrier (BBB) enters the brain impacting its function. Pre-haptoglobin 2 (pHP2), the precursor protein to mature HP2, is the first characterized member of the zonulin family of structurally related proteins. pHP 2 has been identified in humans as the thus far only endogenous regulator of epithelial and endothelial tight junctions (TJs). We have leveraged the Zonulin-transgenic mouse (Ztm) that expresses a murine pHP2 (zonulin) to determine the role of increased gut permeability and its synergy with a dysbiotic intestinal microbiota on brain function and behavior. Here we show that Ztm mice display sex-dependent behavioral abnormalities accompanied by altered gene expression of BBB TJs and increased expression of brain inflammatory genes. Antibiotic depletion of the gut microbiota in Ztm mice downregulated brain inflammatory markers ameliorating some anxiety-like behavior. Overall, we show that zonulin-dependent alterations in gut permeability and dysbiosis of the gut microbiota are associated with an altered BBB integrity, neuroinflammation, and behavioral changes that are partially ameliorated by microbiota depletion. Our results suggest the Ztm model as a tool for the study of the cross-talk between the microbiome/gut and the brain in the context of neurobehavioral/neuroinflammatory disorders.
34775905|a|The adaptation aftereffect plays a critical role in human development and survival. Existing studies have found that, compared with general individuals, individuals with learning disability, autism and dyslexia show a smaller amount of non-affective-based cognitive adaptation aftereffect. Nevertheless, it is unclear whether individuals with depression or depression tendency show similar phenomenon in the adaptation aftereffect, and whether such depression tendency occurs in the non-affective-based cognitive or emotional adaptation aftereffect. To address this question, the present study conducted two experiments. Experiments 1A and 1B used the emotional facial expression adaptation paradigm to examine whether Chinese participants showed the emotional adaptation aftereffect and whether the emotional adaptation aftereffect was influenced by physical features of faces, respectively. Experiment 2 recruited two groups of participants, with high and low depression, respectively, to examine whether they showed differences in the emotional or cognitive adaptation aftereffect. Results showed that Chinese participants showed the typical emotional adaptation aftereffect, which was not influenced by physical features of faces. More importantly, compared to the low-depression group, the high-depression group showed a smaller emotional adaptation aftereffect, but the two groups showed a similar cognitive adaptation aftereffect. These results suggest that level of depressive symptoms is associated with the emotional adaptation aftereffect.
34775294|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by social communication deficits and patterns of restrictive and repetitive behavior. Although the neurological underpinnings of ASD remain elusive, the endocannabinoid system (ECS) may play a role in modulating social behavior in ASD. Preclinical studies have suggested that alterations in the ECS result in ASD-like phenotypes, but currently no reviews have examined ECS abnormalities in human studies. This scoping review investigated any evidence of ECS alterations in humans with ASD. A comprehensive literature search was conducted and five studies were eligible for review. Three studies reported a significant reduction of anandamide in ASD compared to controls. Other alterations included decreased 2-arachidonoylglycerol, oleoylethanolamide, and palmitoylethanolamide and elevated diacylglycerol lipase and monoacylglycerol lipase. Some discrepant findings were also noted, which included elevated or reduced CB2 receptor in three studies and elevated or reduced N-acyl phosphatidylethanolamine phospholipase D and fatty acid amide hydrolase in two studies. We conclude from this preliminary investigation that the ECS may be altered in humans with ASD. Potential limitations of the reviewed studies include medication use and psychiatric comorbidities. Further research, such as positron emission tomography studies, are necessary to fully understand the relationship between ECS markers and ASD.
34775276|a|BACKGROUND: Different attentional processing of emotional information may underlie social impairments in Autism Spectrum Condition (ASC). It has been hypothesized that individuals with ASC show hypersensitivity to threat, which may be related to an avoidance behaviour. However, research on the attentional processing of emotional information in autism is inconclusive. AIM: To examine the attentional processing biases of 27 children with ASC and 25 typically developed (TD) participants. METHODS AND PROCEDURES: The initial orienting of attention, the attentional engagement, and the attentional maintenance to complex emotional scenes in competition (happy, neutral, threatening, sad) were assessed in a 20-second eye-tracking based free-viewing task. OUTCOMES AND RESULTS: i) children with ASC showed an initial orienting bias towards threatening stimuli; ii) TD children demonstrated an attentional engagement and maintenance bias towards threat, while children with ASC did not; and iii) in children with ASC, attentional problems and somatic complaints were associated with higher initial orienting and with higher attentional maintenance towards threat, respectively. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: These results suggest that a perceived threat induces an early overwhelming response in autism, giving rise to an avoidance behaviour. The findings endorse affective information processing theories and shed light on the mechanisms underlying social disturbances in ASC.
34774901|a|The brain is a predictive machine. Converging data suggests a diametric predictive strategy from autism spectrum disorders (ASD) to schizophrenic spectrum disorders (SSD). Whereas perceptual inference in ASD is rigidly shaped by incoming sensory information, the SSD population is prone to overestimate the precision of their priors' models. Growing evidence considers brain oscillations pivotal biomarkers to understand how top-down predictions integrate bottom-up input. Starting from the conceptualization of ASD and SSD as oscillopathies, we introduce an integrated perspective that ascribes the maladjustments of the predictive mechanism to dysregulation of neural synchronization. According to this proposal, disturbances in the oscillatory profile do not allow the appropriate trade-off between descending predictive signal, overweighted in SSD, and ascending prediction errors, overweighted in ASD. These opposing imbalances both result in an ill-adapted reaction to external challenges. This approach offers a neuro-computational model capable of linking predictive coding theories with electrophysiological findings, aiming to increase knowledge on the neuronal foundations of the two spectra features and stimulate hypothesis-driven rehabilitation/research perspectives.
34774900|a|Neurometabolic diseases (NMDs) are typically caused by genetic abnormalities affecting enzyme functions, which in turn interfere with normal development and activity of the nervous system. Although the individual disorders are rare, NMDs are collectively relatively common and often lead to lifelong difficulties and high societal costs. Neuropsychiatric manifestations, including ADHD symptoms, are prominent in many NMDs, also when the primary biochemical defect originates in cells and tissues outside the nervous system. ADHD symptoms have been described in phenylketonuria, tyrosinemias, alkaptonuria, succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency, X-linked ichthyosis, maple syrup urine disease, and several mitochondrial disorders, but are probably present in many other NMDs and may pose diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. Here we review current literature linking NMDs with ADHD symptoms. We cite emerging evidence that many NMDs converge on common neurochemical mechanisms that interfere with monoamine neurotransmitter synthesis, transport, metabolism, or receptor functions, mechanisms that are also considered central in ADHD pathophysiology and treatment. Finally, we discuss the therapeutic implications of these findings and propose a path forward to increase our understanding of these relationships.
34774550|a|Neurobiology of social contagion/empathy aims to collaborate with the development of treatments for human disorders characterized by the absence of this response - autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, and antisocial personality disorder. Previous studies using sustained aversive stimuli (e.g., neuropathic pain or stress) to induce social contagion behaviors in rodents have demonstrated that these conditions may increase hypernociception, anxiogenic-like effects, and defensive behaviors in cagemates. To amplify the knowledge about behavioral, hormonal, and neural alterations induced by cohabitation with a pair in neuropathic pain, we investigated the effects of this protocol on (i) pain (writhing, formalin, hot plate tests) and depression (sucrose splash test) responses, (ii) the serum levels of corticosterone, testosterone, and oxytocin, (iii) noradrenalin, dopamine and its metabolite (DOPAC and HVA) levels in the amygdaloid complex and insular cortex, (iv) neuronal activation pattern (FosB labeling) in the ventral tegmental area (VTA), paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVN) and supraoptic nucleus (SO). One day after weaning, male Swiss mice were housed in pairs for 14 days. Then, they were divided into two groups: sciatic nerve constricted cagemate [CNC; i.e., one animal of each pair was subjected to sciatic nerve constriction (NC)], and cagemate sham (CS; a similar procedure but with no nerve constriction), and housed for further 14 days. After 28 days of cohabiting, four independent groups were subjected to (a) behavioral analyses (Exp. 1) and (b) blood samples collected for Elisa assays of corticosterone, testosterone, and oxytocin (Exp. 2), remotion of brains for the (c) HPLC in the noradrenaline dopamine and metabolites quantification (Exp. 3) or (d) immunoassays analyses for FosB labeling (Exp. 4). Results showed that cohabitation with a conspecific in chronic pain induces hypernociception and antinociception in the writhing and formalin tests, respectively, and anhedonic-like effects in the sucrose splash test. Hormonal results indicated a decrease in plasma corticosterone only in nerve constricted mice, in testosterone (CNC and NC animals), and an increase in oxytocin serum levels. The neurochemical analyses demonstrated that the social contagion for pain protocol increases in dopamine turnover in the amygdala and insula. This assay also revealed an increase in noradrenaline levels and dopamine turnover within the insula of NC mice. In the FosB labeling measure, we observed a rise in the VTA, PVN and SO in the CNC group whereas for the NC group an increase of this activation pattern occurred only in the VTA. Present results suggest the role of hormones (testosterone and oxytocin) and neurotransmitters (dopamine) in the modulation of behavioral changes induced by social contagion in animals cohabitating with a conspecific in pain.
34774127|a|The construction of the human nervous system is a distinctly complex although highly regulated process. Human tissue inaccessibility has impeded a molecular understanding of the developmental specializations from which our unique cognitive capacities arise. A confluence of recent technological advances in genomics and stem cell-based tissue modeling is laying the foundation for a new understanding of human neural development and dysfunction in neuropsychiatric disease. Here, we review recent progress on uncovering the cellular and molecular principles of human brain organogenesis in vivo as well as using organoids and assembloids in vitro to model features of human evolution and disease.
34774105|a|BACKGROUND: Inhibitory control and attention processing atypicalities are implicated in various diseases, including autism spectrum disorders (ASD). These cognitive functions can be tested by using visually guided saccade-based paradigms in children, adolescents and adults to determine the time course of such disorders. METHODS: In this study, using Gap, Step, Overlap and Antisaccade tasks, we analyzed the oculomotor behavior of 82 children, teenagers and adults with high functioning ASD and their peer typically developing (TD) controls in a two-year follow-up study under the auspices of the InFoR-Autism project. Analysis of correlations between oculomotors task measurements and diagnostic assessment of attentional (ADHD-RS and ADHD comorbidity indices) and executive functioning (BRIEF scales) were conducted in order to evaluate their relationship with the oculomotor performance of participants with ASD. RESULTS: As indicated by the presence of a Gap and Overlap effects in all age groups, the oculomotor performances of ASD participants showed a preserved capability in overt attention switching. In contrast, the difference in performances of ASD participants in the Antisaccade task, compared to their TD peers, indicated an atypical development of inhibition and executive functions. From correlation analysis between our oculomotor data and ADHD comorbidity index, and scores of attention and executive function difficulties, our findings support the hypothesis that a specific dysfunction of inhibition skills occurs in ASD participants that is independent of the presence of ADHD comorbidity. LIMITATIONS: These include the relatively small sample size of the ASD group over the study's two-year period, the absence of an ADHD-only control group and the evaluation of a TD control group solely at the study's inception. CONCLUSIONS: Children and teenagers with ASD have greater difficulty in attention switching and inhibiting prepotent stimuli. Adults with ASD can overcome these difficulties, but, similar to teenagers and children with ASD, they make more erroneous and anticipatory saccades and display a greater trial-to-trial variability in all oculomotor tasks compared to their peers. Our results are indicative of a developmental delay in the maturation of executive and attentional functioning in ASD and of a specific impairment in inhibitory control.
34773992|a|BACKGROUND: Language plays a major role in human behavior. For this reason, neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders in which linguistic ability is impaired could have a big impact on the individual's social interaction and general wellbeing. Such disorders tend to have a strong genetic component, but most past studies examined mostly the linguistic overlaps across these disorders; investigations into their genetic overlaps are limited. The aim of this study was to assess the potential genetic overlap between language impairment and broader behavioral disorders employing methods capturing both common and rare genetic variants. METHODS: We employ polygenic risk scores (PRS) trained on specific language impairment (SLI) to evaluate genetic overlap across several disorders in a large case-cohort sample comprising ~13,000 autism spectrum disorder (ASD) cases, including cases of childhood autism and Asperger's syndrome, ~15,000 attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) cases, ~3000 schizophrenia cases, and ~21,000 population controls. We also examine rare variants in SLI/language-related genes in a subset of the sample that was exome-sequenced using the SKAT-O method. RESULTS: We find that there is little evidence for genetic overlap between SLI and ADHD, schizophrenia, and ASD, the latter being in line with results of linguistic analyses in past studies. However, we observe a small, significant genetic overlap between SLI and childhood autism specifically, which we do not observe for SLI and Asperger's syndrome. Moreover, we observe that childhood autism cases have significantly higher SLI-trained PRS compared to Asperger's syndrome cases; these results correspond well to the linguistic profiles of both disorders. Our rare variant analyses provide suggestive evidence of association for specific genes with ASD, childhood autism, and schizophrenia. CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides, for the first time, to our knowledge, genetic evidence for ASD subtypes based on risk variants for language impairment.
34773854|a|OBJECTIVE: A positive significant association has been found between behavior problems and lower cognition in very low birthweight (VLBW) preterm children at school age, but there is relatively little information about whether such an association exists in toddlers and on the continuity of this association. The aim of this study was to assess if there is a relationship between behavior problems and cognitive performance in VLBW preterm children at 18 months post conception and 3 years old, independent of socioeconomic status and sex. METHOD: Parents of 124 preterm children completed a behavior rating questionnaire (Child Behavior Checklist 1.5-5) to measure behavior problems characteristic of preterm children (Withdrawn, Anxious/Depressed, and Attention Problems). Children completed the Cognitive Scale of the Bayley Scales of Infant Development-III at 18 months and the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale (III or IV) at 36 months old. Socioeconomic status (SES), sex, and diagnoses of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) at 3 years were recorded for each child. RESULTS: Withdrawn problems at 18 months were associated with lower cognitive scores at 18 months and both Withdrawn problems at 18 months and 36 months were associated with lower cognitive scores at 36 months. Increases in Attention Problems scores from 18 to 36 months were associated with decreases in cognitive scores over that period. Lower SES was associated with lower cognitive scores at 36 months and decreases in cognitive scores between 18 and 36 months. Sex was not related to behavior problems or cognition. Diagnoses of ASD and ADHD were significantly associated with increased Withdrawn behavior and Attention Problems, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: The early association of Withdrawn behaviors with less favorable cognitive performance at 18 months and 36 months and the relationship between increases in Attention Problems with decreases in cognitive scores between the toddler and preschool period indicate the need for early assessment of and intervention for behavior problems, as well as concurrent cognitive delays, in VLBW preterm children.
34773541|a|The gut-brain axis refers to the bidirectional connection and communication between the gastrointestinal tract and the central nervous system. This paper explores two routes for this communication that have hitherto remained under-examined: epigenetics and redox signaling and their implications for autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The gut microbiota may induce epigenetic changes in the gut and potentially in the brain through their fermentation products. Instead of through other conceptualizations of them acting as neurotransmitters, gut microbial products may act as epigenetic agents, which are supported by the effects of gut bacterial-derived metabolites on gene regulation and expression. In addition to their epigenetic effects, gut bacterial-derived communicative agents can also influence host signaling by contributing to and even substituting host reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. These ROS can act as second messengers and exert oxidative activity on proteins to influence immune, inflammatory, and other signaling processes. ROS and epigenetic mechanisms may have interactive effects as well. ROS, in addition to their role in signaling pathways and cellular redox alterations, also influence redox-sensitive transcription factors, thereby having an effect on gene expression. Specifically, ROS are involved in the activation of transcription factors, chromatin remodeling, and histone/protein deacetylation. These two proposed mechanisms correspond with the recent findings related to ASD, where a cofactor that is shown to be lower in ASD has antioxidative properties, responds to epigenetic modulation, and increases via microbiota interventions. The current evidence reviewed here suggests the need to update models of the gut-brain communication to include these two mechanisms. Such a modeling can also contribute to understanding the unknowns of host metabolism and physiology in ASD and afford potential therapeutic avenues for this as well as other psychiatric and physiological conditions.
34773316|a|Several studies have demonstrated a high incidence of autistic spectrum features in individuals with Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS). However, do these findings imply a converse relationship that has diagnostic utility? Is SLOS testing implicated when autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is the only clinical indication? AIM: To determine if there is any correlation with a clinical indication of ASD and a biochemical diagnosis of SLOS, based on historical test request and assay data. METHODS: Six years (2008-2013) of clinical test requests for 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC) level were classified and summarised according to indication and final test result. RESULTS: From the audit period, 988 valid test results from post-natal samples were identified. In plasma/serum, mean 7-DHC level was 264.7 mumol/L (normal range < 2.0) for confirmed SLOS cases. No tests performed due to an isolated clinical indication of ASD or where no clinical information was supplied were associated with 7-DHC levels diagnostic for SLOS. CONCLUSIONS: Historical test data analysis supports the recommendation that autism/ASD as a single clinical feature is not an appropriate indication for SLOS (7-DHC) biochemical testing.
34773222|a|Our institution developed and continuously improved a Neurodevelopmental Reflex (NDR) algorithm to help physicians with genetic test ordering for neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). To assess its performance, we performed a retrospective study of 511 patients tested through NDR from 2018 to 2019. SNP Microarray identified pathogenic/likely pathogenic copy number variations in 27/511 cases (5.28%). Among the 484 patients tested for Fragile X FMR1 CGG repeats, a diagnosis (0.20%) was established for one male mosaic for a full mutation, a premutation, and a one-CGG allele. Within the 101 normocephalic female patients tested for MECP2, two patients were found to carry pathogenic variants (1.98%). This retrospective study suggested the NDR algorithm effectively established diagnoses for patients with NDDs with a yield of 5.87%.
34772391|a|BACKGROUND: Autistic adolescents have greater predisposition to depression and suicidality than neurotypical adolescents. Early detection is essential for timely treatment. The Patient Health Questionnaire 9-item (PHQ-9) is a brief screen for depression. The study examines the validity of the PHQ-9 for detecting major depressive disorder (MDD) in autistic youths. METHODS: English speaking youths aged 10-18 years, with DSM-IV/DSM-5/ICD-10 diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), and their parents presenting to a child psychiatric service were invited to participate between May 2018 to August 2020. Participants completed the respective self- and parent-rated PHQ-9 independently. MDD was verified using the MINI-Kid (Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview, Kid version). RESULTS: One hundred one youth, mean (SD) age 14.6 (2.3), were enrolled. 27 (27%) met criteria for current MDD. Mean total PHQ-9 scores, percentage ratings for severity of symptoms of depression, functional impairment, dysthymia and suicidality were compared. Areas under the ROC curve and statistically optimal cutoffs were determined. Parents rated depressive symptoms severity lower than their children. The PHQ-9 displayed low sensitivity with high false negative rates at conventional, adjusted and proposed cutoffs. CONCLUSIONS: Future studies should improve on the validity and reliability of existing depression screening tools, or develop more appropriate screening methods of depression, for autistic youths.
34772339|a|BACKGROUND: Education can contribute to promotion of the quality of life and reduction of heart anxiety in patients with heart failure, so it is important to find a suitable educational method for these patients. Therefore, the present study was an attempt to determine the effect of multimedia education using teach-back method on the life quality and cardiac anxiety in patients with heart failure. METHODS: The present study was a randomized clinical trial. 120 patients with heart failure class I to III and aged less than 60 years old were selected using sequential sampling; then, they were assigned randomly into two intervention groups and one control group. Group A (multimedia education), group B (education using multimedia together with teach-back method), and group C (control). The quality of life and cardiac anxiety were evaluated in the participants of the three groups before, after, 1 month, and 3 months after the intervention. Data were analyzed using descriptive tests, Pearson correlation, Kolmogorov-Smirnov, chi square and ANOVA test in SPSS 22. The significance level was set at P < 0.05. RESULTS: No significant differences were found in the mean scores of the quality of life and cardiac anxiety in the control and two intervention groups before the educational intervention. However, immediately after, 1 month and 3 months after the educational intervention, a significant difference was observed between the mean scores of the quality of life and cardiac anxiety in the intervention groups (P < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Multimedia education together with Teach-Back method is effective in promoting the quality of life and reducing cardiac anxiety in patients with heart failure. Therefore, it is recommended that health policymakers should use this educational method in providing treatment programs. IRANIAN REGISTRY OF CLINICAL TRIALS: 20190917044802N1. Registration date: 5/2/2020.
34770620|a|The emergence of pose estimation algorithms represents a potential paradigm shift in the study and assessment of human movement. Human pose estimation algorithms leverage advances in computer vision to track human movement automatically from simple videos recorded using common household devices with relatively low-cost cameras (e.g., smartphones, tablets, laptop computers). In our view, these technologies offer clear and exciting potential to make measurement of human movement substantially more accessible; for example, a clinician could perform a quantitative motor assessment directly in a patient's home, a researcher without access to expensive motion capture equipment could analyze movement kinematics using a smartphone video, and a coach could evaluate player performance with video recordings directly from the field. In this review, we combine expertise and perspectives from physical therapy, speech-language pathology, movement science, and engineering to provide insight into applications of pose estimation in human health and performance. We focus specifically on applications in areas of human development, performance optimization, injury prevention, and motor assessment of persons with neurologic damage or disease. We review relevant literature, share interdisciplinary viewpoints on future applications of these technologies to improve human health and performance, and discuss perceived limitations.
34769894|a|Sleep problems are common in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, few studies have undertaken group comparisons of sleep profiles and factors associated with poorer sleep between children with ASD without intellectual disability (ID; hereafter referred to as ASD) and ASD with co-occurring ID (hereafter referred to as ASD + ID). This study aimed to (1) compare child (sleep problems and emotional and behavioural problems (EBPs)) and parent factors (parenting stress and mental health) for children with ASD compared to children with ASD + ID, and (2) examine the associations between sleep problems and child and parent factors in both groups. Parents of 56 children with ASD (22 ASD, 34 ASD + ID) aged 6-13 years took part in the study. No statistically significant differences in sleep problems were found between children with ASD compared to children with ASD + ID. However, total EBPs were independently associated with child sleep problems in both groups. Further, 'Self-Absorbed' and 'Communication Disturbance' EBPs were significantly greater in the ASD + ID compared to the ASD group. Overall treatment outcomes for children with ASD may be further improved if consideration is given to the specific types of EBPs being experienced by the child and their association with sleep problems.
34769857|a|Autism spectrum disorder is a neurodevelopmental syndrome with a complicated etiology and could be responsible for disrupted gastrointestinal tract microbiota. The aim of this work was to study intestinal samples from an autistic animal model (BTBR mouse strain) to better describe gastrointestinal alterations. We performed a morphological and biological evaluation of small intestine samples. In terms of morphology, we studied the goblet cells, cells of intestinal mucosal responsible for the production and maintenance of the protective mucous blanket. Alterations in their secretion may indicate an altered rate of mucus synthesis and this is one of the possible causes of gastrointestinal problems. In terms of biological evaluation, impaired regulation of glucose homeostasis regulated by sodium-glucose transporters has been suggested as an important component of obesity and associated comorbidities; therefore, this study analyzed the expression of sodium/glucose transporter-1 and -3 in BTBR mice to better define their role. We demonstrated that, in BTBR mice as compared to C57BL/6J (B6) strain animals: (1) The goblet cells had different protein content in their vesicles and apparently a larger number of Golgi cisternae; (2) the expression and level of sodium/glucose transporters were higher. These findings could suggest new possible targets in autism spectrum disorder to maintain mucus barrier function.
34769501|a|Oxytocin (OT) and vasopressin (AVP) are hypothalamic neuropeptides classically associated with their regulatory role in reproduction, water homeostasis, and social behaviors. Interestingly, this role has expanded in recent years and has positioned these neuropeptides as therapeutic targets for various neuropsychiatric diseases such as autism, addiction, schizophrenia, depression, and anxiety disorders. Due to the chemical-physical characteristics of these neuropeptides including short half-life, poor blood-brain barrier penetration, promiscuity for AVP and OT receptors (AVP-R, OT-R), novel ligands have been developed in recent decades. This review summarizes the role of OT and AVP in neuropsychiatric conditions, as well as the findings of different OT-R and AVP-R agonists and antagonists, used both at the preclinical and clinical level. Furthermore, we discuss their possible therapeutic potential for central nervous system (CNS) disorders.
34768975|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is an umbrella term encompassing several neurodevelopmental disorders such as Asperger syndrome or autism. It is characterised by the occurrence of distinct deficits in social behaviour and communication and repetitive patterns of behaviour. The symptoms may be of different intensity and may vary in types. Risk factors for ASD include disturbed brain homeostasis, genetic predispositions, or inflammation during the prenatal period caused by viruses or bacteria. The number of diagnosed cases is growing, but the main cause and mechanism leading to ASD is still uncertain. Recent findings from animal models and human cases highlight the contribution of glia to the ASD pathophysiology. It is known that glia cells are not only "gluing" neurons together but are key players participating in different processes crucial for proper brain functioning, including neurogenesis, synaptogenesis, inflammation, myelination, proper glutamate processing and many others. Despite the prerequisites for the involvement of glia in the processes related to the onset of autism, there are far too little data regarding the engagement of these cells in the development of ASD.
34768946|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disease that is characterized by a deficit in social interactions and communication, as well as repetitive and restrictive behaviors. Increasing lines of evidence suggest an important role for immune dysregulation and/or inflammation in the development of ASD. Recently, a relationship between inflammation, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction has been reported in the brain tissue of individuals with ASD. Some recent studies have also reported oxidative stress and mitochondrial abnormalities in animal models of maternal immune activation (MIA). This review is focused on the hypothesis that MIA induces microglial activation, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction, a deleterious trio in the brain that can lead to neuroinflammation and neurodevelopmental pathologies in offspring. Infection during pregnancy activates the mother's immune system to release proinflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6, TNF-alpha, and others. Furthermore, these cytokines can directly cross the placenta and enter the fetal circulation, or activate resident immune cells, resulting in an increased production of proinflammatory cytokines, including IL-6. Proinflammatory cytokines that cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) may initiate a neuroinflammation cascade, starting with the activation of the microglia. Inflammatory processes induce oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction that, in turn, may exacerbate oxidative stress in a self-perpetuating vicious cycle that can lead to downstream abnormalities in brain development and behavior.
34768579|a|ASD genetic diagnosis has dramatically improved due to NGS technologies, and many new causative genes have been discovered. Consequently, new ASD phenotypes have emerged. An extensive exome sequencing study carried out by the Autism Sequencing Consortium (ASC) was published in February 2020. The study identified 102 genes which are de novo mutated in subjects affected by autism spectrum disorder (ASD) or similar neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). The majority of these genes was already known to be implicated in ASD or NDDs, whereas approximately 30 genes were considered "novel" as either they were not previously associated with ASD/NDDs or very little information about them was present in the literature. The aim of this work is to review the current literature since the publication of the ASC paper to see if new data mainly concerning genotype-phenotype correlations of the novel genes have been added to the existing one. We found new important clinical and molecular data for 6 of the 30 novel genes. Though the broad and overlapping neurodevelopmental phenotypes observed in most monogenic forms of NDDs make it difficult for the clinical geneticist to address gene-specific tests, knowledge of these new data can at least help to prioritize and interpret results of pangenomic tests to some extent. Indeed, for some of the new emerging genes analyzed in the present work, specific clinical features emerged that may help the clinical geneticist to make the final diagnosis by associating the genetic test results with the phenotype. The importance of this relatively new approach known as "reverse phenotyping" will be discussed.
34768164|a|We evaluated in this umbrella review a systematic collection from meta-analyses conducted on risk factors associated with placenta previa. We searched PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science until April 2021 assessing the risk factors associated with placenta previa. We calculated summary effect estimates odds ratio, relative risk, 95% CI, heterogeneity I2, 95% prediction interval, small-study effects, excess significance biases, and sensitive analysis. The quality of the meta-analyses was evaluated with AMSTAR 2. We included nine studies in the present umbrella review. Seven risk factors including prior induced abortion (OR 1 36, 95% CI: 1 02, 1 69), prior spontaneous abortion (OR 1 77, 95% CI: 1 60, 1 94), male fetus (OR 1 2, 95% CI: 1 2, 1 3), smoking (OR 1 42, 95% CI 1 30, 1 54) (RR 1 27, 95% CI: 1 18, 1 35) advanced maternal age (OR 3 16, 95% CI: 2 79, 3 57), cesarean (OR 1 60, 95% CI: 1 44, 1 76) and ART (singleton pregnancy) (RR 3 71, 95% CI: 2 67, 5 16) were graded as highly suggestive evidence (class III). Endometriosis (OR 3 03, 95% CI: 1 50, 6 13) and maternal cocaine use (OR 2 9, 95% CI: 1 9, 4 3) were graded as risk factors with weak evidence (class IV). This study provides suggestive evidence about prior spontaneous abortion, prior induced abortion, male fetus, smoking, advanced maternal age, cesarean section, and assisted reproductive techniques (singleton pregnancy) as risk factors associated with placenta previa.
34768056|a|BACKGROUND: Autistic youth are often bullied at school, which may lead to school refusal (SR). Currently, there is little research on factors that may help prevent SR among autistic youth. To advance theory-driven preventative interventions, this study examined associations between psychological resilience and emerging SR (ESR) among autistic youth bullied at school. METHODS: Fifty-eight autistic boys in elementary school (grades 1-6; n = 36) or secondary school (grades 8-11; n = 22) who were bullied at school responded to an online survey, as did their mothers. Boys reported on the experience of being bullied, psychological resilience (via the Social Emotional Assets and Resilience Scale), and ESR. Their mothers provided information regarding the boys' Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) diagnosis. RESULTS: Fifty-six percent of this sample of bullied autistic youth displayed ESR. For the secondary school boys there was a significant inverse relationship between psychological resilience and ESR, principally via two characteristics of psychological resilience: 'controlling negative thoughts' and 'remaining calm when angry'. No significant relationship was found between psychological resilience and ESR among elementary school boys. CONCLUSION: Longitudinal research is needed to determine whether psychological resilience serves as a factor protecting against the emergence of SR among autistic youth who have been bullied.
34767796|a|Nutritional inadequacy before birth and during postnatal life can seriously interfere with brain development and lead to persistent deficits in learning and behavior. In this work, we asked if protein malnutrition affects domains of social cognition and if these phenotypes can be transmitted to the next generation. Female mice were fed with a normal or hypoproteic diet during pregnancy and lactation. After weaning, offspring were fed with a standard chow. Social interaction, social recognition memory, and dominance were evaluated in both sexes of F1 offspring and in the subsequent F2 generation. Glucose metabolism in the whole brain was analyzed through preclinical positron emission tomography. Genome-wide transcriptional analysis was performed in the medial prefrontal cortex followed by gene-ontology enrichment analysis. Compared with control animals, malnourished mice exhibited a deficit in social motivation and recognition memory and displayed a dominant phenotype. These altered behaviors, except for dominance, were transmitted to the next generation. Positron emission tomography analysis revealed lower glucose metabolism in the medial prefrontal cortex of F1 malnourished offspring. This brain region showed genome-wide transcriptional dysregulation, including 21 transcripts that overlapped with autism-associated genes. Our study cannot exclude that the lower maternal care provided by mothers exposed to a low-protein diet caused an additional impact on social cognition. Our results showed that maternal protein malnutrition dysregulates gene expression in the medial prefrontal cortex, promoting altered offspring behavior that was intergenerationally transmitted. These results support the hypothesis that early nutritional deficiency represents a risk factor for the emergence of symptoms associated with neurodevelopmental disorders.
34767757|a|There is increasing interest in the potential contribution of the gut microbiome to autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, previous studies have been underpowered and have not been designed to address potential confounding factors in a comprehensive way. We performed a large autism stool metagenomics study (n = 247) based on participants from the Australian Autism Biobank and the Queensland Twin Adolescent Brain project. We found negligible direct associations between ASD diagnosis and the gut microbiome. Instead, our data support a model whereby ASD-related restricted interests are associated with less-diverse diet, and in turn reduced microbial taxonomic diversity and looser stool consistency. In contrast to ASD diagnosis, our dataset was well powered to detect microbiome associations with traits such as age, dietary intake, and stool consistency. Overall, microbiome differences in ASD may reflect dietary preferences that relate to diagnostic features, and we caution against claims that the microbiome has a driving role in ASD.
34767189|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) embrace a diverse set of neurodevelopmental diseases with a multifaceted genetic basis. Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) are among putative loci with critical participation in the development of ASD. Expression of some lncRNAs, namely RP11-466P24.2, SYP-AS1, STXBP5-AS1, and IFNG-AS1 has been decreased in ASD, while AK128569, CTD-2516F10.2, MSNP1AS, RPS10P2-AS1, LINC00693, LINC00689, NEAT1, TUG1, and Shank2-AS lncRNAs have been over-expressed in ASD. Expression of several miRNAs which are implicated in the immunological developmental, immune responses, and protein synthesis as well as those participating in the regulation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR and EGFR signaling pathways is dysregulated in the context of ASD. In the present article, we describe investigations which appraised the role of lncRNAs, miRNAs, and circRNAs in the pathobiology of ASD.
34767135|a|The association of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) with self-reported maternal cannabis use from 3 months pre-conception to delivery ("peri-pregnancy") was assessed in children aged 30-68 months, born 2003 to 2011. Children with ASD (N = 1428) were compared to children with other developmental delays/disorders (DD, N = 1198) and population controls (POP, N = 1628). Peri-pregnancy cannabis use was reported for 5.2% of ASD, 3.2% of DD and 4.4% of POP children. Adjusted odds of peri-pregnancy cannabis use did not differ significantly between ASD cases and DD or POP controls. Results were similar for any use during pregnancy. However, given potential risks suggested by underlying neurobiology and animal models, further studies in more recent cohorts, in which cannabis use and perception may have changed, are needed.
34766900|a|Children with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and disinhibited and reactive attachment disorders (RAD/DAD) often experience socioemotional problems. Elucidating a clear picture of these profiles is essential. Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaires (SDQs) were analysed from cohort of children with ASD (n = 1430), ADHD (n = 1193), and RAD/DAD (n = 39). Kruskal-Wallis Tests and network analytic techniques were used to investigate symptom profiles. Children with ASD experienced more emotional problems, peer problems and fewer prosocial behaviours. Children with ADHD and RAD/DAD had higher levels of hyperactivity and conduct problems. Overall, ASD and ADHD networks were highly correlated (rs = 0.82), and we did not observe a statistically significant difference in terms of global Strength.
34766207|a|A succession of interconnected environmental factors is believed to contribute substantially to the development of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). This exploratory study therefore aims to identify potential risk factors for ASD that are associated with pregnancy, birth and infant feeding. Demographic and health-related data on children aged 3-13 years (N = 4306) was collected through an online survey completed by biological mothers. A fitted logistic regression model identified advanced maternal age, prenatal bleeding, pre-eclampsia, perinatal pethidine usage, foetal distress before birth and male sex of child as associated with an increased risk of ASD, whereas longer gestational duration demonstrated a protective effect. These findings highlight potential risk factors and predictor interrelationships which may contribute to overall ASD risk.
34764909|a|Purpose: Narratives of personal experiences emerge early in language acquisition and are particularly commonly experienced in children's daily lives. To produce these stories, children need to develop narrative, linguistic, and social-cognitive skills. Research has shown that these skills are impaired in children with developmental language disorder (DLD) and high functioning autism (HFA). Aim: This study aimed to determine whether narrative skills are still impaired in adolescence and to highlight the language similarities and differences between teenagers with DLD and HFA in the production of a narrative of a personal experience. Method: Ten teenagers with DLD, 10 teenagers with HFA and 10 typically developing (TD) teenagers, matched on chronological age, told a narrative of a personal experience. These stories were analyzed to evaluate narrative skills through coherence (respect of the narrative schema) and cohesion (anaphora and connectors) and social-cognitive skills (affective and cognitive mental states of the characters, and arbitrary vocalizations such as voice noises). Results: Teenagers with DLD were less compliant with the complication step in the narrative schema than teenagers with HFA or TD. No difference was observed between the three groups of teenagers in terms of cohesion or regarding the positive and negative social-cognitive skills used in narratives. Conclusion: When producing a narrative of a personal experience, HFA teens do not have difficulties neither with narrative skills and with social-cognitive skills assessed in this paper. In DLD the profile of the teens is not the same: They do not have difficulties with social-cognitive skills and with a part of narrative skills (cohesion), and they have difficulties with the narrative schema.
34764892|a|Background: Diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) can be made early in childhood, but also later in adolescence or adulthood. In the latter cases, concerns about an individual's behavior typically lead to consultation of a mental health professional (MHP). As part of the initial clinical examination by the MHP, a clinical diagnostic interview is performed, in order to obtain the patient's history, and may lead to the hypothesis of ASD. We were here interested to study family and developmental history as key parts of the patient's history. The aim of the study was to investigate empirical differences between adolescents with ASD and adolescent control persons in family and developmental history. Method: Clinical diagnostic interview items addressing family and developmental history were adopted from their regular use at several university hospitals and in leading textbooks. Parents of male adolescents with normal intelligence and an ASD diagnosis (n = 67) and parents of male adolescents without psychiatric diagnosis (n = 51) between the age of 12 and 17 years were investigated. Data were operationalized into three categories: 0 = normal behavior, 1 = minor pathological behavior, and 2 = major pathological behavior. Differences were analyzed by multiple t-test of two-way ANOVA. Results: Adolescents with ASD expressed a profile of items significantly differing from control persons. Comparison of significant items with the empirical ASD literature indicated robust accordance. Conclusions: Our findings support the importance and feasibility of the clinical diagnostic interview of family and developmental history for initiation of the diagnostic process of ASD in adolescents.
34764245|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) are complex co-occurring neurodevelopmental conditions. Their genetic architectures reveal striking similarities but also differences, including strong, discordant polygenic associations with educational attainment (EA). To study genetic mechanisms that present as ASD-related positive and ADHD-related negative genetic correlations with EA, we carry out multivariable regression analyses using genome-wide summary statistics (N = 10,610-766,345). Our results show that EA-related genetic variation is shared across ASD and ADHD architectures, involving identical marker alleles. However, the polygenic association profile with EA, across shared marker alleles, is discordant for ASD versus ADHD risk, indicating independent effects. At the single-variant level, our results suggest either biological pleiotropy or co-localisation of different risk variants, implicating MIR19A/19B microRNA mechanisms. At the polygenic level, they point to a polygenic form of pleiotropy that contributes to the detectable genome-wide correlation between ASD and ADHD and is consistent with effect cancellation across EA-related regions.
34763246|a|BACKGROUND: Fetal cerebral sinovenous thrombosis (CSVT) and dural sinus malformation (DSM) are rare types of fetal cerebral venous pathology that are becoming increasingly recognized as fetal imaging advances. Fetal DSMs are a common source of fetal CSVT, although CSVT may occur without a DSM. The literature on these disorders is limited. METHODS: Cases of fetal CSVT and DSM were identified retrospectively through a query of the Indiana University Health fetal imaging archive from 2007 to 2021. RESULTS: Seven cases were identified, all of whom were alive at birth. A DSM was present in six. Treatments after birth included enoxaparin sodium (3), embolization (3), and shunt placements (1). Five cases had documented regression or complete resolution of the thrombus and/or malformation. One was lost to follow-up, one died from complications of hydrocephalus at nine months, one was receiving physical and occupational therapy at last follow-up at three months, one had concern for autism and mild gait abnormality at 21 months, two had concern for speech delay (18 months and 24 months), and one had normal development at most recent follow-up (four years). CONCLUSIONS: Positive short-term outcomes may occur for some cases of fetal CSVT and DSM. However, risk factors and best treatments are not clear, and long-term outcome data are limited. There is a need for further study.
34763169|a|INTRODUCTION AND IMPORTANCE: Although foreign body ingestion is a common medical issue, intestinal perforations following foreign body ingestion are rare. Diagnosing foreign body ingestion is challenging especially in children with neurodevelopmental disorders such as Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). It is believed that approximately 80-90% of ingested foreign bodies pass through the gastrointestinal tract without causing any luminal damage, and only approximately 1% of foreign bodies are known to remain lodged within the bowel and cause luminal erosion and perforation. CASE PRESENTATION: A 14-year-old boy, diagnosed to have Autism Spectrum Disorder was brought in by his parents to our hospital with right lower quadrant (RLQ) abdominal pain and fever. On examination, he was tachycardic and there was direct tenderness over the RLQ of the abdomen. Acute appendicitis was entertained and the patient was examined with ultrasound. The ultrasound reported, "The tip of the appendix was dilated (0.62cm) and there is minimal RLQ intra-peritoneal fluid collection". With the impression of acute appendicitis, the patient was explored and he was found to have a cecum perforation due to an ingested foreign body (twig). Initially we did tube cecostomy but later we did right hemicolectomy because the cecostomy tube had leaked. CONCLUSION: Foreign body ingestion should be taken into account during the evaluation of children and adolescents with neurodevelopmental disorders who presented with acute abdominal pain. Since diagnosis is difficult clinicians who are involved in acute care medicine should take a thorough history with a high index of suspicion for foreign body ingestion.
34763130|a|Synesthesia occurs more commonly in individuals fulfilling criteria for an autism spectrum diagnosis than in the general population. It is associated with autistic traits and autism-related perceptual processing characteristics, including a more detail-focused attentional style and altered sensory sensitivity. In addition, these characteristics correlate with the degree of grapheme-color synesthesia (consistency of grapheme-color associations) in non-synesthetes. We investigated a predominantly non-synesthetic twin sample, including individuals fulfilling criteria for an autism spectrum diagnosis or other neurodevelopmental disorders (n = 65, 14-34 years, 60% female). We modelled linear relationships between the degree of grapheme-color synesthesia and autistic traits, sensory sensitivity, and visual perception, both within-twin pairs (22 pairs) where all factors shared by twins are implicitly controlled (including 50-100% genetics), and across the entire cohort. We found that the degree of grapheme-color synesthesia was associated with autistic traits within the domain of Attention to Details and with sensory hyper-, but not hypo-sensitivity. These associations were stronger within-twin pairs than across the sample. Further, twins with a higher degree of grapheme-color synesthesia were better than their co-twins at identifying fragmented images (Fragmented Pictures Test). This is the first twin study on the association between synesthesia and autism-related perceptual features and traits. The results suggest that investigating these associations within-twin pairs, implicitly adjusting for potential confounding factors shared by twins, is more sensitive than doing so in non-related individuals. Consistent with previous findings, the results suggest an association between the degree of grapheme-color synesthesia and autism-related perceptual features, while utilizing a different measure for sensory sensitivity. The novel finding of enhanced fragmented picture integration in twins with a higher degree of grapheme-color synesthesia challenges the view of a generally more detail-focused attentional style in synesthesia and might be related to enhanced memory or mental imagery in more synesthetic individuals.
34763095|a|During the last decade, the evidences on the relationship between neurodevelopmental disorders and the microbial communities of the intestinal tract have considerably grown. Particularly, the role of gut microbiota (GM) ecology and predicted functions in Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) has been especially investigated by 16S rRNA targeted and shotgun metagenomics, trying to assess disease signature and their correlation with cognitive impairment or gastrointestinal (GI) manifestations of the disease. Herein we present a metaproteomic approach to point out the microbial gene expression profiles, their functional annotations, and the taxonomic distribution of gut microbial communities in ASD children. We pursued a LC-MS/MS based investigation, to compare the GM profiles of patients with those of their respective relatives and aged-matched controls, providing a quantitative evaluation of bacterial metaproteins by SWATH analysis. All data were managed by a multiple step bioinformatic pipeline, including network analysis. In particular, comparing ASD subjects with CTRLs, up-regulation was found for some metaproteins associated with Clostridia and with carbohydrate metabolism (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and glutamate dehydrogenases), while down-regulation was observed for others associated with Bacteroidia (SusC and SusD family together with the TonB dependent receptor). Moreover, network analysis highlighted specific microbial correlations among ASD subgroups characterized by different functioning levels and GI symptoms. SIGNIFICANCE: To the best of our knowledge, this study represents the first metaproteomic investigation on the gut microbiota of ASD children compared with relatives and age-matched CTRLs. Remarkably, the applied SWATH methodology allowed the attribution of differentially regulated functions to specific microbial taxa, offering a novel and complementary point of view with respect to previous studies.
34762844|a|
34762311|a|BACKGROUND: Identifying the brain bases for phenotypic heterogeneity in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) will advance understanding of its pathogenesis and improve its clinical management. METHODS: We compared Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) indices and connectome measures between 77 ASD and 88 Typically Developing (TD) control participants. We also assessed voxel-wise associations of DTI indices with measures of regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) and N-acetylaspartate (NAA) to understand how tissue microstructure associates with cellular metabolism and neuronal density, respectively. RESULTS: Autism Spectrum Disorder participants had significantly lower fractional anisotropy (FA) and higher diffusivity values in deep white matter tracts, likely representing ether reduced myelination by oligodendrocytes or a reduced density of myelinated axons. Greater abnormalities in these measures and regions were associated with higher ASD symptom scores. Participant age, sex and IQ significantly moderated these group differences. Path analyses showed that reduced NAA levels accounted significantly for higher diffusivity and higher rCBF values in ASD compared with TD participants. CONCLUSIONS: Reduced neuronal density (reduced NAA) likely underlies abnormalities in DTI indices of white matter microstructure in ASD, which in turn are major determinants of elevated blood flow. Together, these findings suggest the presence of reduced axonal density and axonal pathology in ASD white matter. Greater pathology in turn accounts for more severe symptoms, lower intellectual ability, and reduced global efficiency for measures of white matter connectivity in ASD.
34762309|a|Resurgence, the recurrence of responding due to a worsening of reinforcement conditions for current behavior, is a prevalent form of treatment relapse. Resurgence as Choice in Context predicts that increasing the duration of exposure to reinforcement for target responding during Phase 1 will increase resurgence magnitude, whereas increasing the duration of exposure to reinforcement for alternative responding and extinction for target responding during Phase 2 will decrease resurgence magnitude. We conducted an experiment evaluating these predictions with human participants recruited through Amazon's Mechanical Turk platform. We varied Phase 1 and Phase 2 durations across 4 experimental groups. Resurgence as Choice in Context successfully predicted the differences in resurgence magnitude across these groups, and fitting the quantitative model to the obtained data yielded an exceptional coefficient of determination. We discuss the implications of these results for using Resurgence as Choice in Context to inform experiments with human participants and the feasibility of using human-operant preparations to evaluate resurgence.
34762235|a|The "Attentional Blink" refers to difficulty in detecting the second of two target stimuli presented in rapid temporal succession. Studies have shown that salient target stimuli, such as one's own name, reduce the magnitude of this effect. Given indications that self-related processing is altered in autism, it is an open question whether this attentional self-bias is reduced in autism. To investigate this, in the current study we utilised an Attentional Blink paradigm involving one's own and others' names, in a group of 24 autistic adults, and 22 neurotypical adults, while measuring EEG. In line with previous studies, the Attentional Blink was reduced when the participant's own name was the second target, with no differences between autistic and neurotypical participants. ERP results show that the effect on the Attentional Blink of one's own name was reflected in increased N2 and P3 amplitudes, for both autistic and nonautistic individuals. This is the first event-related potential study of own-name processing in the context of the Attentional Blink. The results provide evidence of an intact attentional self-bias in autism, both at the behavioural and neural level.
34762009|a|Objective: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in very young children with significant cognitive impairment is difficult to diagnose, depriving them of the earliest opportunities for autism-specific intervention. This study delineated specific symptoms in this group, compared to symptoms in children with Global Developmental Delay (GDD) and in ASD with milder developmental delays.Method: Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule, 2nd Edition, Toddler Module revealed symptoms in three groups of toddlers, with mean ages of 17-20 months: (1) ASD and cognitive/language functioning below the 12-month level (ASD-MA < 12 mos; n = 28), (2) GDD (n = 27), and (3) ASD and cognitive/language functioning at or above the 12-month level (ASD-MA >= 12 mos; n = 29). Logistic regression models were fit to control for developmental level. Results: Items in all domains (social interaction, communication, repetitive movements) discriminated ASD-MA < 12 mos from GDD. The two ASD groups, matched for age but differing on developmental level, showed strikingly similar ASD symptomatology. Conclusion: ADOS-2 symptoms differentiated ASD-MA < 12 mos from GDD, after controlling for cognitive impairment. Symptoms in the two ASD groups were minimally related to developmental level. The ADOS-2 Toddler Module successfully captured ASD symptomatology even in children whose developmental level was below the recommended ADOS-2 cutoff of 12 months, which may increase their access to early ASD-specific intervention.
34761553|a|The prevalence of autism worldwide has risen steadily in the last two decades, while bilingualism is also becoming increasingly prevalent in today's rapidly globalizing world. The current study aimed to investigate bilingualism effects in the pronoun resolution skills of children with autism in comparison to age-matched monolingual children with autism, as well as monolingual and bilingual children of typical development (Nu = 20 participants per group). Results showed that autistic children had general difficulty anchoring ambiguous pronouns to entities that were linguistically expressed in discourse, yet, the bilingual children with autism were more sensitive to the topicality of the entities in syntactic subject position and more prone to identify them as suitable referents of ambiguous null pronouns as compared to their monolingual peers. The findings suggest that bilingualism is not detrimental to autistic children's pronoun resolution skills. The current study aimed at determining how bilingualism influences ambiguous pronoun comprehension in children with autism as compared to bilingual and monolingual children of typical development. The findings show that bilingualism was not detrimental to the autistic children's pronoun resolution skills, further suggesting that having acquired more than one language does not exacerbate autistic children's deficits in the comprehension of pronouns.
34761367|a|Accurate diagnosis of psychiatric disorders plays a critical role in improving the quality of life for patients and potentially supports the development of new treatments. Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) are shown to be successful in modeling applications with graph structures. However, training an accurate GCNs model for brain networks faces several challenges, including high dimensional and noisy correlation in the brain networks, limited labeled training data, and depth limitation of GCN learning. Generalization and interpretability are important in developing predictive models for clinical diagnosis. To address these challenges, we proposed an ensemble framework involving hierarchical GCN and transfer learning for sparse brain networks, which allows GCN to capture the intrinsic correlation among the subjects and domains, to improve the network embedding learning for disease diagnosis. Extensive experiments on two real medical clinical applications: diagnosis of Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) on both the ADNI and ABIDE databases, showing the effectiveness of the proposed framework. We achieved state-of-the-art accuracy and AUC for AD/MCI and ASD/NC (Normal control) classification in comparison with studies that used functional connectivity as features or GCN models. The proposed TE-HI-GCN model achieves the best classification performance, leading to about 27.93% (31.38%) improvement for ASD and 16.86% (44.50%) for AD in terms of accuracy and AUC compared with the traditional GCN model. Moreover, the obtained clustering results show high correspondence with the previous neuroimaging derived evidence of within and between-networks biomarkers for ASD. The discovered subnetworks are used as evidence for the proposed TE-HI-GCN model. Furthermore, this work is the first attempt of transfer learning on the two related disorder domains to uncover the correlation among the two diseases with a transfer learning scheme.
34761363|a|Access to the Internet has upended long-standing myths and misconceptions about autism as autistic individuals are enabled through technology increasingly to influence the dialog around neurodiversity, the experience of being autistic, and the effectiveness of mental health interventions for autistic adults. Autistic self-advocates are speaking up in support of including neurodivergent adults as a population that might benefit from the burgeoning psychedelic medicine field, in an absence of many other mental health treatment options that have been researched and shown to be effective for them. Autism is a genetically-determined neurocognitive variant with considerable heterogeneity across the broad autistic phenotype spectrum. Therefore, enthusiasm for investigating psychedelics to cure or alter the course of autism is most likely ill-informed and misdirected; psychiatric and psychopharmacological interventions do not alter the genome. However, autism frequently co-occurs with clinical conditions such as anxiety, depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and trauma that have been investigated as indications for clinical trials with classic and atypical psychedelics. The purpose of this chapter will be to inform researchers and clinicians on the history of clinical research with classic psychedelics with autistic minors, recent and current clinical trials of atypical psychedelics with autistic adults, and considerations for providing psychedelic-assisted psychotherapies that are compatible with autism.
34761259|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellectual disability (ID) often exist together in patients. The RAB39B gene has been reported to be mutated in ID patients with additional clinical features ranging from ASD, macrocephaly, seizures and/or early-onset parkinsonism. Here, we describe a novel RAB39B nonstop mutation [Xq28; c.640 T > C; p.(*214Glnext*21)] in a family with ASD, severe ID and poor motor coordination, and we assessed the pathogenicity of the mutation. A heterologous cell system and a Rab39b knockdown (KD) murine model, which mimic the nonstop mutation, were used to validate the deleterious effect of the RAB39B mutation. The mutation led to RAB39B protein instability, resulting in its increased degradation and consequent downregulation. Using a Rab39b KD mouse model, we demonstrated that the downregulation of RAB39B led to increased GluA2 lacking Ca2+-permeable AMPAR composition at the hippocampal neuronal surface and increased dendritic spine density that remained in an immature filopodia-like state. These phenotypes affected behavioural performance in a disease-specific manner. Rab39b KD mice revealed impaired social behaviour but intact social recognition. They also showed normal anxiety-like, exploratory, and motivational behaviours but impaired working and associative memories. In conclusion, we found a novel RAB39B nonstop variant that segregated in a family with a clinical phenotype including ID, ASD and poor motor coordination. The pathogenicity of mutations causing the downregulation of RAB39B proteins, impacting AMPAR trafficking and dendritic spine morphogenesis, reinforced the idea that AMPAR modulation and dendritic spine assets could be considered hallmarks of neurodevelopmental disorders.
34760921|a|Fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) is an RNA binding protein (RBP) whose absence is essentially associated to Fragile X Syndrome (FXS). As an RNA Binding Protein (RBP), FMRP is able to bind and recognize different RNA structures and the control of specific mRNAs is important for neuronal synaptic plasticity. Perturbations of this pathway have been associated with the autistic spectrum. One of the FMRP partners is the APP mRNA, the main protagonist of Alzheimer's disease (AD), thereby regulating its protein level and metabolism. Therefore FMRP is associated to two neurodevelopmental and age-related degenerative conditions, respectively FXS and AD. Although these pathologies are characterized by different features, they have been reported to share a number of common molecular and cellular players. The aim of this review is to describe the double-edged sword of FMRP in autism and AD, possibly allowing the elucidation of key shared underlying mechanisms and neuronal circuits. As an RBP, FMRP is able to regulate APP expression promoting the production of amyloid beta fragments. Indeed, FXS patients show an increase of amyloid beta load, typical of other neurological disorders, such as AD, Down syndrome, Parkinson's Disease, etc. Beyond APP dysmetabolism, the two neurodegenerative conditions share molecular targets, brain circuits and related cognitive deficits. In this review, we will point out the potential common neuropathological pattern which needs to be addressed and we will hopefully contribute to clarifying the complex phenotype of these two neurorological disorders, in order to pave the way for a novel, common disease-modifying therapy.
34760790|a|Objectives: The purpose of the systematic review was to provide a summary and evaluation of oral sensory challenges in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Materials and Methods: The review evaluated 19 studies that met the inclusion and search criteria. The review is registered in Prospero Database (CRD42020179852). The 14 studies (8 case-control, 4 cohort, 1 observational, and 1 randomized clinical trial) were related to speech disorders and five studies (case-control studies) were associated with feeding and eating behavior in ASD. The meta-analysis of speech and feeding behavior was analyzed by using risk ratios (RRs) and standardized mean difference (SMD), with 95% confidence interval (CI). Results: The meta-analysis found a statistically significant difference of speech disorder between children and adolescents of ASD when compared with typically developed or other neurotypical children of similar age [0.4891 (95% CI = -2.4580; 1.4799), fixed effect; -0.1726 (95% CI = -14.2925; 7.5697), random effect]. Feeding and eating behavior reported a statistically significant difference between ASD children and adolescents with similar age group of typically developed controls [0.0433 (95% CI = -0.3531; 0.4398), fixed-effect; 0.3711 (95% CI = -3.0751; 3.8172), random effect]. Conclusion: The speech errors and feeding behavior were more consistent in ASD than in typically developed controls. The oral sensory challenges such as speech disorder and feeding behavior were more prevalent in ASD children and adolescents than in typically developed children and adolescents of the same age group. There was a significant lack in oral sensory-motor synchronization, incomplete motor planning, and poor oral neuromuscular coordination.
34759846|a|Background: Emotional dysregulation (ED) is a transdiagnostic construct defined as the inability to regulate the intensity and quality of emotions (such as, fear, anger, sadness), in order to generate an appropriate emotional response, to handle excitability, mood instability, and emotional overreactivity, and to come down to an emotional baseline. Because ED has not been defined as a clinical entity, and because ED plays a major role in child and adolescent psychopathology, we decided to summarize current knowledge on this topic based on a narrative review of the current literature. Methods: This narrative review is based on a literature search of peer-reviewed journals. We searched the databases ERIC, PsycARTICLES, PsycINFO and PSYNDEX on June 2, 2020 for peer reviewed articles published between 2000 and 2020 in English language for the preschool, school, and adolescent age (2-17 years) using the following search terms: "emotional dysregulation" OR "affect dysregulation," retrieving 943 articles. Results: The results of the literature search are presented in the following sections: the relationship between ED and psychiatric disorders (ADHD, Mood Disorders, Psychological Trauma, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, Non-suicidal Self-Injury, Eating Disorders, Oppositional Defiant Disorder, Conduct Disorder, Disruptive Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder, Personality Disorders, Substance Use Disorder, Developmental Disorders, Autism Spectrum Disorder, Psychosis and Schizophrenia, and Gaming Disorder), prevention, and treatment of ED. Conclusion: Basic conditions of ED are genetic disposition, the experience of trauma, especially sexual or physical abuse, emotional neglect in childhood or adolescence, and personal stress. ED is a complex construct and a comprehensive concept, aggravating a number of various mental disorders. Differential treatment is mandatory for individual and social functioning.
34759794|a|The fetal origins of adult disease (FOAD) hypothesis, which was proposed by David Barker in the United Kingdom in the late 1980s, posited that adult chronic diseases originated from various adverse stimuli in early fetal development. FOAD is associated with a wide range of adult chronic diseases, including cardiovascular disease, cancer, type 2 diabetes and neurological disorders such as schizophrenia, depression, anxiety, and autism. Intrauterine hypoxia/prenatal hypoxia is one of the most common complications of obstetrics and could lead to alterations in brain structure and function; therefore, it is strongly associated with neurological disorders such as cognitive impairment and anxiety. However, how fetal hypoxia results in neurological disorders remains unclear. According to the existing literature, we have summarized the causes of prenatal hypoxia, the effects of prenatal hypoxia on brain development and behavioral phenotypes, and the possible molecular mechanisms.
34759296|a|Previous studies have found that Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) children scored lower during a Go/No-Go task and faced difficulty focusing their gaze on the speaker's face during a conversation. To date, however, there has not been an adequate study examining children's response and gaze during the Go/No-Go task to distinguish ASD from typical children. We investigated typical and ASD children's gaze modulation when they played a version of the Go/No-Go game. The proposed system represents the Go and the No-Go stimuli as chicken and cat characters, respectively. It tracks children's gaze using an eye tracker mounted on the monitor. Statistically significant between-group differences in spatial and auto-regressive temporal gaze-related features for 21 ASD and 31 typical children suggest that ASD children had more unstable gaze modulation during the test. Using the features that differ significantly as inputs, the AdaBoost meta-learning algorithm attained an accuracy rate of 88.6% in differentiating the ASD subjects from the typical ones.
34758999|a|INTRODUCTION: Specialist gender services for children and young people (CYP) worldwide have experienced a significant increase in referrals in recent years. As rates of referrals increase, it is important to understand the characteristics and profile of CYP attending these services in order to inform treatment pathways and to ensure optimal outcomes. METHODS AND ANALYSIS: A retrospective observational study of clinical health records from specialist gender services for CYP in the UK and the Netherlands. The retrospective analysis will examine routinely collected clinical and outcome measures data including demographic, clinical, gender identity-related and healthcare resource use information. Data will be reported for each service and also compared between services. This study forms part of a wider programme of research investigating outcomes of gender identity in children (the Longitudinal Outcomes of Gender Identity in Children study). ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The proposed study has been approved by the Health Research Authority and London-Hampstead Research Ethics Committee as application 19/LO/0181. The study findings will be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at both conferences and stakeholder events.
34758868|a|BACKGROUND: In many countries, children who are diagnosed with autism during the first 5 years of life are offered a range of early intervention options. These options vary considerably in the theoretical approaches and techniques applied, their intensity and duration, settings, the person/s delivering supports and the training they require. Early interventions are a significant contributor to total autism-related costs in Western countries, but only in the last 10-20 years has there been adequate outcome data to enable the comparison of different interventions' cost-effectiveness. This protocol describes a scoping review to better understand what economic evaluations have been completed in this field, and the methods used to date. METHODS: We will systematically search the following databases from their inception to 2021 for eligible studies: MEDLINE, EMBASE, PsycINFO, Econlit, PEDE, NHS EED and HTA. Full economic evaluations of any types of early intervention for children with autism prior to school entry will be included. Two reviewers will screen the studies, extract the data and assess the study quality using established checklists. The risk of bias will be assessed using the extended CHEC-list for all studies and, additionally, the Philips checklist for modelled studies. Quality of reporting will be assessed using the CHEERS checklist. A narrative synthesis will be completed to collate the findings, describe the methods used and identify which interventions have been researched from an economic perspective. DISCUSSION: This review will provide researchers, policymakers and service providers with current information about the economic evidence for early interventions for young children with autism and point to priorities for further research. It will inform future economic evaluations by highlighting the gaps or inconsistencies in the methods used to date. Limitations of the review will be acknowledged and discussed. SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: Open Science Framework:  https://osf.io/sj7kt.
34758298|a|Impaired synaptic neurotransmission may underly circuit alterations contributing to behavioral autism spectrum disorder (ASD) phenotypes. A critical component of impairments reported in somatosensory and prefrontal cortex of ASD mouse models are parvalbumin (PV)-expressing fast-spiking interneurons. However, it remains unknown whether PV interneurons mediating hippocampal networks crucial to navigation and memory processing are similarly impaired. Using PV-labeled transgenic mice, a battery of behavioral assays, in vitro patch-clamp electrophysiology, and in vivo 32-channel silicon probe local field potential recordings, we address this question in a Cntnap2-null mutant mouse model representing a human ASD risk factor gene. Cntnap2-/- mice show a reduction in hippocampal PV interneuron density, reduced inhibitory input to CA1 pyramidal cells, deficits in spatial discrimination ability, and frequency-dependent circuit changes within the hippocampus, including alterations in gamma oscillations, sharp-wave ripples, and theta-gamma modulation. Our findings highlight hippocampal involvement in ASD and implicate interneurons as a potential therapeutical target.
34757590|a|Understanding the mechanisms underlying amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is crucial for the development of new therapies. Previous studies have demonstrated that mitochondrial dysfunction is a key pathogenetic event in ALS. Interestingly, studies in Alzheimer's disease (AD) post-mortem brain and animal models link alterations in mitochondrial function to interactions between hyperphosphorylated tau and dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP1), the GTPase involved in mitochondrial fission. Recent evidence suggest that tau may be involved in ALS pathogenesis, therefore, we sought to determine whether hyperphosphorylated tau may lead to mitochondrial fragmentation and dysfunction in ALS and whether reducing tau may provide a novel therapeutic approach. Our findings demonstrated that pTau-S396 is mis-localized to synapses in post-mortem motor cortex (mCTX) across ALS subtypes. Additionally, the treatment with ALS synaptoneurosomes (SNs), enriched in pTau-S396, increased oxidative stress, induced mitochondrial fragmentation, and altered mitochondrial connectivity without affecting cell survival in vitro. Furthermore, pTau-S396 interacted with DRP1, and similar to pTau-S396, DRP1 accumulated in SNs across ALS subtypes, suggesting increases in mitochondrial fragmentation in ALS. As previously reported, electron microscopy revealed a significant decrease in mitochondria density and length in ALS mCTX. Lastly, reducing tau levels with QC-01-175, a selective tau degrader, prevented ALS SNs-induced mitochondrial fragmentation and oxidative stress in vitro. Collectively, our findings suggest that increases in pTau-S396 may lead to mitochondrial fragmentation and oxidative stress in ALS and decreasing tau may provide a novel strategy to mitigate mitochondrial dysfunction in ALS. pTau-S396 mis-localizes to synapses in ALS. ALS synaptoneurosomes (SNs), enriched in pTau-S396, increase oxidative stress and induce mitochondrial fragmentation in vitro. pTau-S396 interacts with the pro-fission GTPase DRP1 in ALS. Reducing tau with a selective degrader, QC-01-175, mitigates ALS SNs-induced mitochondrial fragmentation and increases in oxidative stress in vitro.
34757563|a|Analyzing the relation between intelligence and neural activity is of the utmost importance in understanding the working principles of the human brain in health and disease. In existing literature, functional brain connectomes have been used successfully to predict cognitive measures such as intelligence quotient (IQ) scores in both healthy and disordered cohorts using machine learning models. However, existing methods resort to flattening the brain connectome (i.e., graph) through vectorization which overlooks its topological properties. To address this limitation and inspired from the emerging graph neural networks (GNNs), we design a novel regression GNN model (namely RegGNN) for predicting IQ scores from brain connectivity. On top of that, we introduce a novel, fully modular sample selection method to select the best samples to learn from for our target prediction task. However, since such deep learning architectures are computationally expensive to train, we further propose a learning-based sample selection method that learns how to choose the training samples with the highest expected predictive power on unseen samples. For this, we capitalize on the fact that connectomes (i.e., their adjacency matrices) lie in the symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrix cone. Our results on full-scale and verbal IQ prediction outperforms comparison methods in autism spectrum disorder cohorts and achieves a competitive performance for neurotypical subjects using 3-fold cross-validation. Furthermore, we show that our sample selection approach generalizes to other learning-based methods, which shows its usefulness beyond our GNN architecture.
34757514|a|In 2011, the European Society for the Study of Tourette Syndrome (ESSTS) published the first European guidelines for Tourette Syndrome (TS). We now present an update of the part on pharmacological treatment, based on a review of new literature with special attention to other evidence-based guidelines, meta-analyses, and randomized double-blinded studies. Moreover, our revision took into consideration results of a recent survey on treatment preferences conducted among ESSTS experts. The first preference should be given to psychoeducation and to behavioral approaches, as it strengthens the patients' self-regulatory control and thus his/her autonomy. Because behavioral approaches are not effective, available, or feasible in all patients, in a substantial number of patients pharmacological treatment is indicated, alone or in combination with behavioral therapy. The largest amount of evidence supports the use of dopamine blocking agents, preferably aripiprazole because of a more favorable profile of adverse events than first- and second-generation antipsychotics. Other agents that can be considered include tiapride, risperidone, and especially in case of co-existing attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), clonidine and guanfacine. This view is supported by the results of our survey on medication preference among members of ESSTS, in which aripiprazole was indicated as the drug of first choice both in children and adults. In treatment resistant cases, treatment with agents with either a limited evidence base or risk of extrapyramidal adverse effects might be considered, including pimozide, haloperidol, topiramate, cannabis-based agents, and botulinum toxin injections. Overall, treatment of TS should be individualized, and decisions based on the patient's needs and preferences, presence of co-existing conditions, latest scientific findings as well as on the physician's preferences, experience, and local regulatory requirements.
34756330|a|OBJECTIVE: To examine whether rare damaging genetic variants are associated with chromosomally normal pregnancy loss and estimate the magnitude of the association. DESIGN: Case-control. SETTING: Cases were derived from a consecutive series of karyotyped losses at one New Jersey hospital. Controls were derived from the National Database for Autism Research. PATIENT(S): Cases comprised 19 chromosomally normal loss conceptus-parent trios. Controls comprised 547 unaffected siblings of autism case-parent trios. INTERVENTION(S): None. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): The rate of damaging variants in the exome (loss of function and missense-damaging) and the proportions of probands with at least one such variant among cases vs. controls. RESULTS: The proportions of probands with at least one rare damaging variant were 36.8% among cases and 22.9% among controls (odds ratio, 2.0; 99% confidence interval, 0.5-7.3). No case had a variant in a known fetal anomaly gene. The proportion with variants in possibly embryonic lethal genes increased in case probands (odds ratio, 14.5; 99% confidence interval, 1.5-89.7); variants occurred in BAZ1A, FBN2, and TIMP2. CONCLUSION(S): Rare genetic variants in the conceptus may be a cause of chromosomally normal pregnancy loss. A larger sample is needed to estimate the magnitude of the association with precision and identify relevant biologic pathways.
34755919|a|BACKGROUND: Poor working memory, lower IQ and maladaptive behaviour form a triple disability known to have negative effects on the academic and social development of children with borderline intellectual functioning (BIF; IQ: 70 < IQ < 85) and neuropsychiatric disorders [attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and/or autism spectrum disorder (ASD)]. Treatment possibilities for these children are scarce and hardly evidence based. This study primarily investigated whether adaptive computerised working memory training (WMT) may lead to significantly more improvement on a non-trained visuospatial WM task compared with a non-adaptive control WMT (placebo) in children with BIF and neuropsychiatric disorders. As secondary outcome measures, we used the scores on several non-trained neuropsychological near-transfer and far-transfer tasks as well as behavioural measures. METHOD: We conducted a triple-blind placebo-controlled randomised clinical trial in 72 children (aged 10;0-13;11 years, 53 boys, 19 girls) with BIF and comorbid neuropsychiatric disorders (ADHD = 37, ASD = 21, both = 14) that were referred to child and adolescent psychiatry care, between May 2012 and March 2019. Children completed the Dutch version of Cogmed WMT, either the adaptive training version or the non-adaptive placebo version, 25 sessions (30-45 min a day), for 5 weeks. The primary outcome measure was the score on a non-trained visuospatial working memory task. The primary outcome was measured before and directly after 5 weeks of WMT and again 6 months after training. RESULTS: A total of 375 children were screened for eligibility and 72 were randomised. No significantly higher levels of improvement over time were found on our primary outcome measure in the experimental WMT group compared with the placebo control WMT, nor in the secondary (near-transfer and far-transfer tasks) or tertiary (behavioural measures) outcome measures. However, this study did show changes over time for these measurements for both the experimental and placebo conditions. CONCLUSIONS: This study was unable to document superior training effects over time of an adaptive WMT in children with BIF and neuropsychiatric disorders, compared with a placebo (non-adaptive) WMT. The objectively documented changes over time in the non-adaptive WMT arm suggest that these children with persistent impairments in WM may benefit from a structured learning environment that is associated with improvement of neurocognitive functioning and coping strategies. Further research is needed to examine which elements of cognitive training may be useful for which specific patients and to study long-term effects of training.
34755628|a|BACKGROUND: Documentation of patterns and long-term trends in mortality in young people, which reflect huge changes in demographic and social determinants of adolescent health, enables identification of global investment priorities for this age group. We aimed to analyse data on the number of deaths, years of life lost, and mortality rates by sex and age group in people aged 10-24 years in 204 countries and territories from 1950 to 2019 by use of estimates from the Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study (GBD) 2019. METHODS: We report trends in estimated total numbers of deaths and mortality rate per 100 000 population in young people aged 10-24 years by age group (10-14 years, 15-19 years, and 20-24 years) and sex in 204 countries and territories between 1950 and 2019 for all causes, and between 1980 and 2019 by cause of death. We analyse variation in outcomes by region, age group, and sex, and compare annual rate of change in mortality in young people aged 10-24 years with that in children aged 0-9 years from 1990 to 2019. We then analyse the association between mortality in people aged 10-24 years and socioeconomic development using the GBD Socio-demographic Index (SDI), a composite measure based on average national educational attainment in people older than 15 years, total fertility rate in people younger than 25 years, and income per capita. We assess the association between SDI and all-cause mortality in 2019, and analyse the ratio of observed to expected mortality by SDI using the most recent available data release (2017). FINDINGS: In 2019 there were 1 49 million deaths (95% uncertainty interval 1 39-1 59) worldwide in people aged 10-24 years, of which 61% occurred in males. 32 7% of all adolescent deaths were due to transport injuries, unintentional injuries, or interpersonal violence and conflict; 32 1% were due to communicable, nutritional, or maternal causes; 27 0% were due to non-communicable diseases; and 8 2% were due to self-harm. Since 1950, deaths in this age group decreased by 30 0% in females and 15 3% in males, and sex-based differences in mortality rate have widened in most regions of the world. Geographical variation has also increased, particularly in people aged 10-14 years. Since 1980, communicable and maternal causes of death have decreased sharply as a proportion of total deaths in most GBD super-regions, but remain some of the most common causes in sub-Saharan Africa and south Asia, where more than half of all adolescent deaths occur. Annual percentage decrease in all-cause mortality rate since 1990 in adolescents aged 15-19 years was 1 3% in males and 1 6% in females, almost half that of males aged 1-4 years (2 4%), and around a third less than in females aged 1-4 years (2 5%). The proportion of global deaths in people aged 0-24 years that occurred in people aged 10-24 years more than doubled between 1950 and 2019, from 9 5% to 21 6%. INTERPRETATION: Variation in adolescent mortality between countries and by sex is widening, driven by poor progress in reducing deaths in males and older adolescents. Improving global adolescent mortality will require action to address the specific vulnerabilities of this age group, which are being overlooked. Furthermore, indirect effects of the COVID-19 pandemic are likely to jeopardise efforts to improve health outcomes including mortality in young people aged 10-24 years. There is an urgent need to respond to the changing global burden of adolescent mortality, address inequities where they occur, and improve the availability and quality of primary mortality data in this age group. FUNDING: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
34755500|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is typically characterized by common deficits in social skills and repetitive/stereotyped behaviors. It is widely accepted that genetic and environmental factors solely or in combination cause ASD. However, the underlying pathogenic mechanism is unclear due to its highly heterogeneous nature. To better understand the pathogenesis of ASD, various animal models have been generated, which can be generally divided into genetic, environment-induced, and idiopathic animal models. In this review, we summarize the common animals used for ASD study and then discuss the applications, clinical insights, as well as challenges and prospects of current ASD animal models.
34755374|a|OBJECTIVE: 6-Shogaol, bioactive compound of Zingiber officinale Roscoe, has anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and neuroprotective properties. The objective of the present study was to verify the effect of 6-shogaol on behavioral parameters in a preclinical model based on a maternal immune activation (MIA) by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). METHODOLOGY: Twelve pregnant Wistar rats received 100-mug/kg LPS or saline solution on gestational day (GD) 9.5. Male offspring participated in the study and in the postnatal day (PND) 30 and 55 were supplemented with 6-shogaol or saline solution, by gavage at a dose of 10 mg/kg/day, orally for 5 days. In the PND 35 and 60 was performed the behavioral tests: grooming, crossing, and rearing that evaluated repetitive movements, anxiety, and interest in the new, respectively, and the inhibitory avoidance test that evaluated short-term (STM) and long-term memory (LTM). RESULT: Prenatal exposure to LPS increased the grooming and crossing episodes at different ages and reduced rearing episodes in PND 37. Treatment with 6-shogaol reversed these parameters. In the inhibitory avoidance test, an improvement of memory was identified with 6-shogaol in the STM and LTM at both ages comparing training and test session of treated groups and between groups. CONCLUSION: Administration of 6-shogaol reverses the stereotypy, exploratory behavior, and memory impairment in prenatal LPS-exposed offspring, acting as a promising therapeutic component against brain disorders associated with the process of MIA.
34754688|a|Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS) is a rare genetic disorder caused by germline mutations in the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) gene. Clinical manifestations arise early during childhood and include multiple lipomas, hamartomatous intestinal polyps, macrocephaly, developmental delay, and autism spectrum disorder among others. The case describes a 24-year-old female with a recent diagnosis of BRRS who presented for evaluation of burning epigastric pain for the previous six months. The esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and colonoscopy revealed an erosive gastric mucosa as well as numerous polyps throughout the gastrointestinal tract. Histopathologic examination confirmed gastric Helicobacter pylori infection and different histologic types of polyps.
34754519|a|Background: Human resources are one of the most critical organizational resources, the reinforcement and maintenance of whom require much energy in health organizations, particularly in long-term crises. Many methods have been suggested in this regard; however, there is a need for their integration and clarification. Methods: We systematically searched the international databases, including PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science, from 2003 to April 2021by using some relevant keywords. The quality of the included studies was assessed using the AMSTAR checklist. Results: The search resulted in 1613 papers, among which there were 16 systematic reviews. The studies addressed a wide range of problems and solutions. Twelve items and four items were classified with moderate quality (AMSTER score 5-8) and high quality (AMSTER score 9-11), respectively. Half of the studies (n = 8) dealt with mental and psychological problems resulting from crises as the most important factor in the decline of health system staff's durability in organizations. They also provided different solutions such as mental health counselling during and after the crisis, flexible work schedule, promoted trust in the organization, support of staff's family, and enhanced awareness to support employees. And the other articles addressed managerial problems as the most critical factor in the decline of health system staff's durability in organizations and proposed solutions such as suitable planning before, during, and after the crisis and the use of material and spiritual incentives to increase the employees' motivation and organizational resilience to maintain the staff. Conclusion: In the present review study, three dimensions (namely, resilience, motivation-hygiene measures, and development of manager's soft skills) are considered as the main factors reinforcing and maintaining human resources in the health systems in long-term crises and disasters.
34753841|a|AIM AND OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to evaluate the satisfaction of an oral health promotion program among parents and caregivers of children with special healthcare needs (CSHCN) in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A digital survey using Google forms was used during an event to commemorate the World Disability Day. Stalls for oral health education and training were set up at Disabled Children Society, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Oral health education was carried out using written pamphlets, brochures, and videos. Live demonstration on dental models was used for tooth-brushing training using a powered toothbrush. Parents and caregivers were asked to complete a survey about oral health education during the event. An overall 189 parents and caregivers of CSHCN including 62 males and 127 females completed the survey. The responses were entered digitally prior to being evaluated. RESULTS: The respondents were parents and/or caregivers of children mostly having cerebral palsy followed by autism. Females consisted of 67% of the respondents. Eight-one percent of respondents rated it as highly satisfied. Ninety-one percent of the respondents perceived that the information provided was new for them regarding oral healthcare for CSHCN. Ninety-eight percent of respondents were likely to attend a similar event in the future. CONCLUSION: Majority of parents and caregivers of CSHCN were highly satisfied by the oral health education during the event. They felt that they can take better care of the oral health of their CSHCN after the oral health education and training. CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Oral health among CSHCN is neglected when compared to children among the general population. CSHCN exhibit many barriers to oral health care. Oral health promotion among CSHCN is important as they have a high unmet oral health need.
34753609|a|
34753541|a|OBJECTIVES: To study the effect of probiotics combined with applied behavior analysis (ABA) in the treatment of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). METHODS: A total of 41 children with ASD who attended the Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University from May 2019 to December 2020 were enrolled and randomly divided into an observation group with 21 children and a control group with 20 children. The children in the observation group were given oral probiotics combined with ABA intervention, while those in the control group were given ABA intervention alone. The treatment outcomes were compared between the two groups. Autism Treatment Evaluation Checklist (ATEC) was used to evaluate the severity of behavioral symptoms in both groups before intervention and at 3 months after intervention. The fecal samples were collected to analyze the difference in intestinal flora between the two groups based on 16s rRNA high-throughput sequencing. RESULTS: Before intervention, there was no significant difference in the ATEC score between the observation and control groups (P>0.05). At 3 months after intervention, both groups had a significant reduction in the ATEC score, and the observation group had a significantly lower ATEC score than the control group (P<0.05). Before intervention, there was no significant difference in the composition of intestinal flora between the observation and control groups. At 3 months after intervention, there was a significant difference in the composition of intestinal flora between the observation and control groups. Compared with the control group, the observation group had significantly higher relative abundances of Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Coprobacillus, Ruminococcus, Prevotella, and Blautia (P<0.05) and significantly lower relative abundances of Shigella and Clostridium (P<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Probiotics may improve the effect of conventional ABA intervention in children with ASD by regulating intestinal flora.
34753194|a|OBJECTIVE: To describe life-time use of current actionable pharmacogenetic (PGx) somatic and psychotropic drugs according to international PGx consortia in people with and without hospital-diagnosed mental disorders in the Danish population. METHODS: Population- and register-based observational drug utilization study in 56 065 individuals with mental disorders, i. e. attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism, bipolar disorder, depression and schizophrenia, and a random, representative sample of 29 975 individuals of the Danish population, born between 1981 and 2005. Individuals were followed from 1995 or birth until 2016 (for a maximum of 22 years). We report prevalence and incidence rates of PGx drug use by age, sex and mental disorders based on redeemed prescriptions between 1995 and 2016. RESULTS: Of the 69 PGx drugs, prescriptions of 39 drugs had been redeemed by the study population by 35 years of age. The use of at least 1 PGx drug varied between 23.1% in males without mental disorders and 97.2% in females with schizophrenia. Males with ADHD or autism were the youngest first-time PGx drug users at a mean of 11.6 years. The mean number of different PGx drugs used was 1.2 in males without mental disorders and 5.6 in individuals with schizophrenia. The prevalence of different PGx drugs linked to more than one gene was 25.3% in males without mental disorders to 94.1% in females with schizophrenia. CONCLUSION: PGx drugs are commonly used by younger people, more often by individuals with mental disorders and by females. Panel-based PGx testing could contribute to treatment decisions at a very young age.
34753079|a|BACKGROUND: Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-based morphometry and relaxometry are proven methods for the structural assessment of the human brain in several neurological disorders. These procedures are generally based on T1-weighted (T1w) and/or T2-weighted (T2w) MRI scans, and rigid and affine registrations to a standard template(s) are essential steps in such studies. Therefore, a fully automatic quality control (QC) of these registrations is necessary in big data scenarios to ensure that they are suitable for subsequent processing. METHOD: A supervised machine learning (ML) framework is proposed by computing similarity metrics such as normalized cross-correlation, normalized mutual information, and correlation ratio locally. We have used these as candidate features for cross-validation and testing of different ML classifiers. For 5-fold repeated stratified grid search cross-validation, 400 correctly aligned, 2000 randomly generated misaligned images were used from the human connectome project young adult (HCP-YA) dataset. To test the cross-validated models, the datasets from autism brain imaging data exchange (ABIDE I) and information eXtraction from images (IXI) were used. RESULTS: The ensemble classifiers, random forest, and AdaBoost yielded best performance with F1-scores, balanced accuracies, and Matthews correlation coefficients in the range of 0.95-1.00 during cross-validation. The predictive accuracies reached 0.99 on the Test set #1 (ABIDE I), 0.99 without and 0.96 with noise on Test set #2 (IXI, stratified w.r.t scanner vendor and field strength). CONCLUSIONS: The cross-validated and tested ML models could be used for QC of both T1w and T2w rigid and affine registrations in large-scale MRI studies.
34751923|a|The stop-signal paradigm has become ubiquitous in investigations of inhibitory control. Tasks inspired by the paradigm, referred to as stop-signal tasks, require participants to make responses on go trials and to inhibit those responses when presented with a stop-signal on stop trials. Currently, the most popular version of the stop-signal task is the 'choice-reaction' variant, where participants make choice responses, but must inhibit those responses when presented with a stop-signal. An alternative to the choice-reaction variant of the stop-signal task is the 'anticipated response inhibition' task. In anticipated response inhibition tasks, participants are required to make a planned response that coincides with a predictably timed event (such as lifting a finger from a computer key to stop a filling bar at a predefined target). Anticipated response inhibition tasks have some advantages over the more traditional choice-reaction stop-signal tasks and are becoming increasingly popular. However, currently, there are no openly available versions of the anticipated response inhibition task, limiting potential uptake. Here, we present an open-source, free, and ready-to-use version of the anticipated response inhibition task, which we refer to as the OSARI (the Open-Source Anticipated Response Inhibition) task.
34751867|a|There are many case reports of seizures apparently associated with the prescription of antipsychotics. This study aimed to examine whether there is an association between the prescription of antipsychotics and incident seizures in individuals with autism spectrum disorder using retrospective data based on patients' chart review. A cohort study was conducted to compare the rate of incident seizure between 3923 users of antipsychotics with 10,086 users of other psychotropics. This was followed by a self-controlled case series (SCCS) analysis of 149 patients to eliminate the effect of time-invariant confounders. The results showed no evidence of increased risk of seizure after exposure to antipsychotic agents (Hazard Ratio 1.28, 95% CI 0.74-2.19) compared to other psychotropics.
34751141|a|Fragile X (FX) syndrome is one of the leading inherited causes of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). A majority of FX and ASD patients exhibit sensory hypersensitivity, including auditory hypersensitivity or hyperacusis, a condition in which everyday sounds are perceived as much louder than normal. Auditory processing deficits in FX and ASD also afford the opportunity to develop objective and quantifiable outcome measures that are likely to translate between humans and animal models due to the well-conserved nature of the auditory system and well-developed behavioral read-outs of sound perception. Therefore, in this study we characterized auditory hypersensitivity in a Fmr1 knockout (KO) transgenic rat model of FX using an operant conditioning task to assess sound detection thresholds and suprathreshold auditory reaction time-intensity (RT-I) functions, a reliable psychoacoustic measure of loudness growth, at a variety of stimulus frequencies, bandwidths, and durations. Male Fmr1 KO and littermate WT rats both learned the task at the same rate and exhibited normal hearing thresholds. However, Fmr1 KO rats had faster auditory RTs over a broad range of intensities and steeper RT-I slopes than WT controls, perceptual evidence of excessive loudness growth in Fmr1 KO rats. Furthermore, we found that Fmr1 KO animals exhibited abnormal perceptual integration of sound duration and bandwidth, with diminished temporal but enhanced spectral integration of sound intensity. Because temporal and spectral integration of sound stimuli were altered in opposite directions in Fmr1 KO rats, this suggests that abnormal RTs in these animals are evidence of aberrant auditory processing rather than generalized hyperactivity or altered motor responses. Together, these results are indicative of fundamental changes to low-level auditory processing in Fmr1 KO animals. Finally, we demonstrated that antagonism of metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGlu5) selectively and dose-dependently restored normal loudness growth in Fmr1 KO rats, suggesting a pharmacologic approach for alleviating sensory hypersensitivity associated with FX. This study leverages the tractable nature of the auditory system and the unique behavioral advantages of rats to provide important insights into the nature of a centrally important yet understudied aspect of FX and ASD.
34750519|a|
34750364|a|Synaptic pruning during adolescence is important for appropriate neurodevelopment and synaptic plasticity. Aberrant synaptic pruning may underlie a variety of brain disorders such as schizophrenia, autism and anxiety. Dopamine D2 receptor (Drd2) is associated with several neuropsychiatric diseases and is the target of some antipsychotic drugs. Here we generate self-reporting Drd2 heterozygous (SR-Drd2+/-) rats to simultaneously visualize Drd2-positive neurons and downregulate Drd2 expression. Time course studies on the developing anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) from control and SR-Drd2+/- rats reveal important roles of Drd2 in regulating synaptic pruning rather than synapse formation. Drd2 also regulates LTD, a form of synaptic plasticity which includes some similar cellular/biochemical processes as synaptic pruning. We further demonstrate that Drd2 regulates synaptic pruning via cell-autonomous mechanisms involving activation of mTOR signaling. Deficits of Drd2-mediated synaptic pruning in the ACC during adolescence lead to hyper-glutamatergic function and anxiety-like behaviors in adulthood. Taken together, our results demonstrate important roles of Drd2 in cortical synaptic pruning.
34750348|a|There is emerging evidence demonstrating an association between maternal polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in children, however, the cumulative effect of maternal PCOS on the development of ASD or other neuropsychiatry disorders (NPD) in children and separately for males and females has not been examined. We sought to systematically evaluate the influence of maternal PCOS on a wide range of NPD including ASD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), chronic tic disorder (CDT), other behavior disorders, anxiety, depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia in children as well as in women of reproductive age only. We queried electronic databases including PubMed, EMBASE, and Google Scholar, until March 2021. We used DerSimonian and Laird (D-L) random effects method to compute pooled effect size in terms of odds ratio (OR). Nineteen studies (1667851 mothers, 2260622 children) were included in this study. Mothers with PCOS had an increased odds of children diagnosed with ASD (OR = 1.40, p < 0.001), ADHD (OR = 1.42, p < 0.001), CTD (OR = 1.44, p = 0.001), anxiety (OR = 1.33, p < 0.001), as well as other behavioral symptoms (OR = 1.45, p < 0.001) in the adjusted analysis. The association between maternal PCOS and ASD (OR: 1.43 vs. 1.66), ADHD (OR: 1.39 vs. 1.54), and CTD (OR: 1.42 vs. 1.51) was found to be significantly consistent between males and females, respectively. Our data do not suggest increased fetal testosterone exposure is associated with increased autistic traits in children. However, PCOS was significantly associated with increased odds of a wide range of NPD in women themselves. Maternal PCOS is a risk factor for various NPD with a similar extent in their children regardless of their underlying comorbidities. Managing PCOS is essential for women's health as well as for their children's health. More research is needed to determine the mechanisms and links between maternal PCOS and NPD in children.
34750095|a|This seminar in epileptology addresses Learning Objective 6.1.4 of the International League against Epilepsy Curriculum: Demonstrate the ability to recognize and manage the special needs of persons with epilepsy (and Neurodevelopmental Disorders [NDDs]). The review identifies the essential competencies for neurologists working with people with epilepsy and NDDs, and these competencies are discussed alongside clinical examples. Furthermore, the seminar explores the opportunities offered by integrated service provision between neurology and services for NDD. The epileptic encephalopathies are not a subject of this seminar paper as they are circumscribed by other ILAE learning objectives. This seminar frames the complexity of seizures in association with NDD with a focus on major NDDs; intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. The evidence presented considers epidemiology, co-morbidities, risk factors, mortality, and the diagnostic and treatment challenges. People with NDDs and epilepsy have higher rates of physical and psychiatric co-morbidity, polypharmacy, neuropsychiatric side effects of drugs, and premature mortality including sudden unexpected death in epilepsy. There is a limited Level 1 evidence base to guide assessment and treatment for seizures in adults with NDDs. Therefore, throughout this seminar, the evidence presented for associations and treatment should be observed in context along with its limitations. The evidence for pharmacological treatment of seizures in association with NDDs is presented alongside expert commentary and guidance. There is Level 2 evidence to support treatment with some of the newer anti-seizure medications including brivaracetam, lacosamide, eslicarbazepine acetate, and perampanel as second-line choices. Seizures with a co-morbid NDD should be considered as a collective complex clinical presentation and not discrete conditions. This seminar was co-designed, co-produced and co-authored by an expert by experience and includes case studies and a video to highlight what can go wrong and how it can be avoided.
34749814|a|
34749190|a|This study examined the application of active inference to dynamic visuomotor control. Active inference proposes that actions are dynamically planned according to uncertainty about sensory information, prior expectations, and the environment, with motor adjustments serving to minimise future prediction errors. We investigated whether predictive gaze behaviours are indeed adjusted in this Bayes-optimal fashion during a virtual racquetball task. In this task, participants intercepted bouncing balls with varying levels of elasticity, under conditions of higher or lower environmental volatility. Participants' gaze patterns differed between stable and volatile conditions in a manner consistent with generative models of Bayes-optimal behaviour. Partially observable Markov models also revealed an increased rate of associative learning in response to unpredictable shifts in environmental probabilities, although there was no overall effect of volatility on this parameter. Findings extend active inference frameworks into complex and unconstrained visuomotor tasks and present important implications for a neurocomputational understanding of the visual guidance of action.
34748996|a|Carpenter syndrome 1 (CRPT1) is an acrocephalopolysyndactyly (ACPS) disorder characterized by craniosynostosis, polysyndactyly, obesity, and other malformations. It is caused by mutations in the gene RAB23. We are reporting on two patients from two unrelated consanguineous Egyptian families. Patient 1 presented with an atypical clinical presentation of Carpenter syndrome including overgrowth with advanced bone age, epileptogenic changes on electroencephalogram and autistic features. Patient 2 presented with typical clinical features suggestive of Carpenter syndrome. Therefore, Patient 1 was subjected to whole exome sequencing (WES) to find an explanation for his unusual features and Patient 2 was subjected to Sanger sequencing of the coding exons of theRAB23 gene to confirm the diagnosis. We identified a novel homozygous missense RAB23 variant (NM_001278668:c.T416C:p.Leu139Pro) in Patient 1 and a novel homozygous splicing variant (NM_016277.5:c.398+1G > A) in Patient 2. We suggest that the overgrowth with advanced bone age, electroencephalogram epileptogenic changes, and autistic features seen in Patient 1 are an expansion of the Carpenter phenotype and could be due to the novel missense RAB23 variant. Additionally, the novel identified RAB23 variants in Patient 1 and 2 broaden the spectrum of variants associated with Carpenter syndrome.
34748809|a|Camurus' FluidCrystal  injection depot is a lipid liquid crystal (LLC) phase formation-based method, comprising of glycerol dioleate (GDO) and soy phosphatidylcholine (SPC), together with minute quantities of N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone solvent (NMP). The present study aimed to develop a method for LLC using sorbitan monooleate (LLC-SMO) instead of GDO to prepare a one-month sustained-release formulation of naltrexone (NTX) that is applied for the treatment of autism and treating alcohol dependence. The optical characteristics of the LLC were assessed by polarizing light microscopy (PLM) to reveal the presence of lamellar, hexagonal, and cubic mesophases. Furthermore, in vitro release of NTX and NMP, degradation, pharmacokinetics, and histopathology of LLC-GDO and LLC-SMO in rats were evaluated and compared to those of Vivitrol . The PLM images revealed that the structure of LLC-SMO is hexagonal, similar to LLC-GDO. The in vitro release of NTX and its pharmacokinetic results in rats indicted that the LLC-SMO system is more uniform than LLC-GDO and Vivitrol  during 35 days. Histopathological results of LLC-GDO and LLC-SMO confirmed the biocompatibility of our LLC delivery systems. Taken together these data demonstrate that the LLC-SMO-based method, was efficient enough to sustain the release of NTX in vitro and in vivo, confirming the biocompatible nature of this delivery system.
34748727|a|Transcription factor 4 (TCF4) is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor essential for neurocognitive development. The aberrations in TCF4 are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders including schizophrenia, intellectual disability, and Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, an autism-spectrum disorder characterized by developmental delay. Several disease-associated missense mutations in TCF4 have been shown to interfere with TCF4 function, but for many mutations, the impact remains undefined. Here, we tested the effects of 12 functionally uncharacterized disease-associated missense mutations and variations in TCF4 using transient expression in mammalian cells, confocal imaging, in vitro DNA-binding assays, and reporter assays. We show that Pitt-Hopkins syndrome-associated missense mutations within the basic helix-loop-helix domain of TCF4 and a Rett-like syndrome-associated mutation in a transcription activation domain result in altered DNA-binding and transcriptional activity of the protein. Some of the missense variations found in schizophrenia patients slightly increase TCF4 transcriptional activity, whereas no effects were detected for missense mutations linked to mild intellectual disability. We in addition find that the outcomes of several disease-related mutations are affected by cell type, TCF4 isoform, and dimerization partner, suggesting that the effects of TCF4 mutations are context-dependent. Together with previous work, this study provides a basis for the interpretation of the functional consequences of TCF4 missense variants.
34748187|a|
34748134|a|Universal developmental surveillance is considered best practice for early identification of autism. We analysed data from 175 New Zealand Well-Child/Tamariki Ora nurses who attended a 1-day training in developmental surveillance for autism using the social attention and communication surveillance-revised (SACS-R) tool. We used a survey to measure nurses' knowledge of typical development, knowledge of early signs of autism, general autism knowledge, and confidence in identifying and discussing early signs, prior to the workshop, after the workshop, and at follow-up. We measured perceived acceptability of the SACS-R after the workshop and at follow-up. Nurses showed improvements on all measures from pre-workshop to post-workshop and pre-workshop to follow-up. Implementation of the SACS-R across different contexts appears feasible and acceptable.
34748133|a|As many individuals in the general population will likely interact with autistic persons in various contexts, ensuring adequate autism knowledge and awareness is important. Increased knowledge of autism has been linked to positive outcomes such as a reduction in explicit bias against autism by non-autistic adults and an increase in service quality for autistic individuals provided by indirect professionals. For this study we developed an informational video about autism and employed a randomized control trial to evaluate its effectiveness at increasing autism awareness in a general population sample. Participants were randomly assigned to the intervention (n = 80) or active control group (n = 72). Results from a repeated measures analysis of variance indicated that the video intervention was effective at increasing knowledge about autism. Results from this study can be applied to future educational efforts aimed at increasing awareness about autism among the general population.
34748075|a|Pathogenic variants of the myelin transcription factor-1 like (MYT1L) gene include heterozygous missense, truncating variants and 2p25.3 microdeletions and cause a syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder (OMIM#616,521). Despite enrichment in de novo mutations in several developmental disorders and autism studies, the data on clinical characteristics and genotype-phenotype correlations are scarce, with only 22 patients with single nucleotide pathogenic variants reported. We aimed to further characterize this disorder at both the clinical and molecular levels by gathering a large series of patients with MYT1L-associated neurodevelopmental disorder. We collected genetic information on 40 unreported patients with likely pathogenic/pathogenic MYT1L variants and performed a comprehensive review of published data (total = 62 patients). We confirm that the main phenotypic features of the MYT1L-related disorder are developmental delay with language delay (95%), intellectual disability (ID, 70%), overweight or obesity (58%), behavioral disorders (98%) and epilepsy (23%). We highlight novel clinical characteristics, such as learning disabilities without ID (30%) and feeding difficulties during infancy (18%). We further describe the varied dysmorphic features (67%) and present the changes in weight over time of 27 patients. We show that patients harboring highly clustered missense variants in the 2-3-ZNF domains are not clinically distinguishable from patients with truncating variants. We provide an updated overview of clinical and genetic data of the MYT1L-associated neurodevelopmental disorder, hence improving diagnosis and clinical management of these patients.
34746851|a|Background: New treatments for transthyretin amyloidosis improve survival, but diagnosis remains challenging. Pathogenic or likely pathogenic (P/LP) variants in the transthyretin (TTR) gene are one cause of transthyretin amyloidosis, and genomic screening has been proposed to identify at-risk individuals. However, data on disease features and penetrance are lacking to inform the utility of such population-based genomic screening for TTR. Objectives: This study characterized the prevalence of P/LP variants in TTR identified through exome sequencing and the burden of associated disease from electronic health records for individuals with these variants from a large (N = 134,753), primarily European-ancestry cohort. Methods: We compared frequencies of common disease features and cardiac imaging findings between individuals with and without P/LP TTR variants. Results: We identified 157 of 134,753 (0.12%) individuals with P/LP TTR variants (43% male, median age 52 [Q1-Q3: 37-61] years). Seven P/LP variants accounted for all observations, the majority being V122I (p.V142I; 113, 0.08%). Approximately 60% (n = 91) of individuals with P/LP TTR variants (all V122I) had African ancestry. Diagnoses of amyloidosis were limited (2 of 157 patients), although related heart disease diagnoses, including cardiomyopathy and heart failure, were significantly increased in individuals with P/LP TTR variants who were aged >60 years. Fourteen percent (7 of 49) of individuals aged >=60 or older with a P/LP TTR variant had heart disease and ventricular septal thickness >1.2 cm, only one of whom was diagnosed with amyloidosis. Conclusions: Individuals with P/LP TTR variants identified by genomic screening have increased odds of heart disease after age 60 years, although amyloidosis is likely underdiagnosed without knowledge of the genetic variant.
34746699|a|Genetic studies of autism have revealed causal roles for chromatin remodeling gene mutations. Chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 8 (CHD8) encodes a chromatin remodeler with significant de novo mutation rates in sporadic autism. However, relationships between CHD8 genomic function and autism-relevant biology remain poorly elucidated. Published studies utilizing ChIP-seq to map CHD8 protein-DNA interactions have high variability, consistent with technical challenges and limitations associated with this method. Thus, complementary approaches are needed to establish CHD8 genomic targets and regulatory functions in developing brain. We used in utero CHD8 Targeted DamID followed by sequencing (TaDa-seq) to characterize CHD8 binding in embryonic mouse cortex. CHD8 TaDa-seq reproduced interaction patterns observed from ChIP-seq and further highlighted CHD8 distal interactions associated with neuronal loci. This study establishes TaDa-seq as a useful alternative for mapping protein-DNA interactions in vivo and provides insights into the regulatory targets of CHD8 and autism-relevant pathophysiology associated with CHD8 mutations.
34746237|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder featuring impairment in verbal and non-verbal interactions, defects in social interactions, stereotypic behaviors as well as restricted interests. In recent times, the incidence of ASD is growing at a rapid pace. In spite of great endeavors devoted to explaining ASD pathophysiology, its precise etiology remains unresolved. ASD pathogenesis is related to different phenomena associated with the immune system; however, the mechanisms behind these immune phenomena as well as the potential contributing genes remain unclear. In the current work, we used a bioinformatics approach to describe the role of long non-coding RNA (lncRNA)-associated competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs) in the peripheral blood (PB) samples to figure out the molecular regulatory procedures involved in ASD better. The Gene Expression Omnibus database was used to obtain the PB microarray dataset (GSE89594) from the subjects suffering from ASD and control subjects, containing the data related to both mRNAs and lncRNAs. The list of immune-related genes was obtained from the ImmPort database. In order to determine the immune-related differentially expressed mRNAs (DEmRNAs) and lncRNAs (DElncRNAs), the limma package of R software was used. A protein-protein interaction network was developed for the immune-related DEmRNAs. By employing the Human MicroRNA Disease Database, DIANA-LncBase, and DIANA-TarBase databases, the RNA interaction pairs were determined. We used the Pearson correlation coefficient to discover the positive correlations between DElncRNAs and DEmRNAs within the ceRNA network. Finally, the lncRNA-associated ceRNA network was created based on DElncRNA-miRNA-DEmRNA interactions and co-expression interactions. In addition, the KEGG enrichment analysis was conducted for immune-related DEmRNAs found within the constructed network. This work found four potential DElncRNA-miRNA-DEmRNA axes in ASD pathogenesis, including, LINC00472/hsa-miR-221-3p/PTPN11, ANP32A-IT1/hsa-miR-182-5p/S100A2, LINC00472/hsa-miR-132-3p/S100A2, and RBM26-AS1/hsa-miR-182-5p/S100A2. According to pathway enrichment analysis, the immune-related DEmRNAs were enriched in the "JAK-STAT signaling pathway" and "Adipocytokine signaling pathway." An understanding of regulatory mechanisms of ASD-related immune genes would provide novel insights into the molecular mechanisms behind ASD pathogenesis.
34745222|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD), characterized by profound impairment in social interactions and communication skills, is the most common neurodevelopmental disorder. Many studies on the mechanisms underlying the development of ASD have focused on the serotonergic system; however, these studies have failed to completely elucidate the mechanisms. We previously identified N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF) as a new serotonin transporter (SERT)-binding protein and described its importance in SERT membrane trafficking and uptake in vitro. In the present study, we generated Nsf +/- mice and investigated their behavioral, neurotransmitter, and neurophysiological phenotypes in vivo. Nsf +/- mice exhibited abnormalities in sociability, communication, repetitiveness, and anxiety. Additionally, Nsf loss led to a decrease in membrane SERT expression in the raphe and accumulation of glutamate alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid receptors at the synaptic membrane surface in the hippocampal CA1 region. We found that postsynaptic density and long-term depression were impaired in the hippocampal CA1 region of Nsf +/- mice. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that NSF plays a role in synaptic plasticity and glutamatergic and serotonergic systems, suggesting a possible mechanism by which the gene is linked to the pathophysiology of autistic behaviors.
34744898|a|By employing the transactional model of development and focusing on the multifactorial nature of parenting, this study aimed to (1) examine whether important risk factors, particularly mothers' insecure attachment styles and parenting stress contribute to the perception of their infants' characteristics and (2) explore whether maternal attachment styles moderate the relationship between parenting stress and perceived infants' characteristics. We recruited 357 mothers (age: 34.23; +- 5.38) who had 1-year-old infants (161 males and 196 females; age: 12.70; +- 1.60 months). All the mothers completed three self-report instruments: Parenting Stress Index-Short Form (PSI-SF), Attachment Style Questionnaire (ASQ), and 1st-Year Inventory (FYI). Although the latter was originally developed to determine the risk for autism in 1-year-olds, it was employed in this study to measure infant's characteristics within two domains: social communication and sensory regulatory functions. Multiple regression analyses revealed that one of the PSI-SF dimensions - specifically the Parent-Child Dysfunctional Interaction - contributed to mothers' perceptions of their children's social communication abilities, whereas the attachment style did not. Other multiple regression analyses showed that all the dimensions of parenting stress - that is, Parenting Distress (PD), Parent-Child Dysfunctional Interaction (PCDI), and Difficult Child (DC) - contributed to mothers' perceptions of their sensory regulatory abilities. The attachment styles, particularly anxious attachment, contributed significantly to a biased perception of these abilities controlled for parenting stress. Mothers reporting high levels of avoidance and high levels of PD viewed their children as less able in the social communicative domain (SC Dom) than if they had low levels of PD. By contrast, when levels of avoidance were low, mothers with high PD perceived their children as less difficult in the SC Dom than those with low levels of PD. Moreover, high avoidance levels influenced how mothers who considered the interaction with their children as difficult perceived them as having greater difficulties in relation to sensory regulatory domain (SR Dom). By contrast, mothers with high levels of anxiety high levels of PD view their children as less able in the SC Dom than if they had low levels of PD. When mothers' levels of anxiety were very low, those with high PD viewed their children as less difficult in the SC Dom in comparison to those with low levels of PD.
34744886|a|The information about what one can see and what other people can see from different viewpoints is important. There are circumstances in which adults and children make systematic errors when predicting what is visible from their own or others' viewpoints. This happens for example when reasoning about mirrors. We explored differences among three developmental groups: young adults (N=60) typically developing children (N=30); and children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD, N=30). We used an illustration of a top-down view of a room with a mirror on a wall (Room Observer and Mirror Perspective test: ROMP). Participants selected (circled on paper) which objects behind the observer in the room were visible, reflected from the mirror and from a given position (viewpoint). For half of each group, the observer in the room was described as a teddy bear; for the other half, it was described as a child. Overall, there were many errors in all groups, which we separate in errors of ignoring the viewpoint (same response to all three locations) and inversion errors (choosing objects on the left instead of the right or vice versa). In addition to the overall task difficulty, the ASD group made relatively more mistakes of ignoring the viewpoint compared to the other groups and underestimated how many objects were visible in the teddy bear condition that is when the viewpoint was an inanimate object. We suggest that this is related to a delay in theory of mind (ToM) development.
34744883|a|Background: The present review provides an original examination of published literature on the use of Dance Movement Psychotherapy (DMP) as an intervention for children with an Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Method: The review was systematically conducted using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) guidelines. A protocol consisting of four phases: identification; screening and selection; data extraction and synthesis; quality assurance was developed and registered with the PROSPERO. A search strategy was developed using population and intervention as the key concepts and ten databases were searched between 6.1.2018 to 4.4.2018 and 10.07.2021 to 20.07.2021. The intervention characteristics were extracted based on the TIDieR template for intervention description and replication checklist. Quality assessment and level of evidence of all the included studies were evaluated using the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool (MMAT) and the Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine (CEBM) for treatment criteria. Results: Nine research studies with a total of 133 participants were identified through a systematic search process. There was only one mixed-methods study with the component of randomisation found during the literature search. Collected information was synthesised in relation to (a) ways in which dance movement psychotherapists work with children; (b) data collection methods and findings. Results from the reviewed literature suggest that DMP can potentially promote various aspects of well-being in children with ASD. Eight out of nine studies mentioned the effects of DMP on improving different social and communication skills. However, results from quality assessments and synthesised outcomes indicate that research in DMP is still in its infancy. Conclusions: We conclude that further large-scale, high-quality studies are required to generate further evidence that explains the processes involved in DMP, the effectiveness of DMP, the relationship between therapeutic factors of DMP, and research findings for children on the autism spectrum. Systematic Review Protocol Registration: PROSPERO, identifier: CRD42018087912.
34744824|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a serious neurodevelopmental disorder and characterized by early childhood-onset impairments in social interaction and communication, restricted and repetitive patterns of behavior or interests. So far there is no effective treatment for ASD, and the pathogenesis of ASD remains unclear. Genetic and epigenetic factors have been considered to be the main cause of ASD. It is known that endocannabinoid and its receptors are widely distributed in the central nervous system, and provide a positive and irreversible change toward a more physiological neurodevelopment. Recently, the endocannabinoid system (ECS) has been found to participate in the regulation of social reward behavior, which has attracted considerable attention from neuroscientists and neurologists. Both animal models and clinical studies have shown that the ECS is a potential target for the treatment of autism, but the mechanism is still unknown. In the brain, microglia express a complete ECS signaling system. Studies also have shown that modulating ECS signaling can regulate the functions of microglia. By comprehensively reviewing previous studies and combining with our recent work, this review addresses the effects of targeting ECS on microglia, and how this can contribute to maintain the positivity of the central nervous system, and thus improve the symptoms of autism. This will provide insights for revealing the mechanism and developing new treatment strategies for autism.
34744810|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with unclear mechanisms of pathogenesis. Gastrointestinal microbiome alterations were found to correlate with ASD core symptoms, but its specific role in ASD pathogenesis has not been determined. In this study, we used a case-control strategy that simultaneously compared the ASD gastrointestinal microbiome with that from age-sex matched controls and first-degree relative controls, using a statistical framework accounting for confounders such as age. Enterobacteriaceae (including Escherichia/Shigella) and Phyllobacterium were significantly enriched in the ASD group, with their relative abundances all following a pattern of ASD > first degree relative control > healthy control, consistent with our hypothesis of living environment and shared microbial and immunological exposures as key drivers of ASD gastrointestinal microbiome dysbiosis. Using multivariable omnibus testing, we identified clinical factors including ADOS scores, dietary habits, and gastrointestinal symptoms that covary with overall microbiome structure within the ASD cohort. A microbiome-specific multivariate modeling approach (MaAsLin2) demonstrated microbial taxa, such as Lachnoclostridium and Tyzzerella, are significantly associated with ASD core symptoms measured by ADOS. Finally, we identified alterations in predicted biological functions, including tryptophan and tyrosine biosynthesis/metabolism potentially relevant to the pathophysiology of the gut-brain-axis. Overall, our results identified gastrointestinal microbiome signature changes in patients with ASD, highlighted associations between gastrointestinal microbiome and clinical characteristics related to the gut-brain axis and identified contributors to the heterogeneity of gastrointestinal microbiome within the ASD population.
34744805|a|Background: Psychiatric disorders have been historically classified using symptom information alone. Recently, there has been a dramatic increase in research interest not only in identifying the mechanisms underlying defined pathologies but also in redefining their etiology. This is particularly relevant for the field of personalized medicine, which searches for data-driven approaches to improve diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment selection for individual patients. Methods: This review aims to provide a high-level overview of the rapidly growing field of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) from the perspective of unsupervised machine learning applications for disease subtyping. Following the PRISMA guidelines for protocol reproducibility, we searched the PubMed database for articles describing functional MRI applications used to obtain, interpret, or validate psychiatric disease subtypes. We also employed the active learning framework ASReview to prioritize publications in a machine learning-guided way. Results: From the 20 studies that met the inclusion criteria, five used functional MRI data to interpret symptom-derived disease clusters, four used it to interpret clusters derived from biomarker data other than fMRI itself, and 11 applied clustering techniques involving fMRI directly. Major depression disorder and schizophrenia were the two most frequently studied pathologies (35% and 30% of the retrieved studies, respectively), followed by ADHD (15%), psychosis as a whole (10%), autism disorder (5%), and the consequences of early exposure to violence (5%). Conclusions: The increased interest in personalized medicine and data-driven disease subtyping also extends to psychiatric disorders. However, to date, this subfield is at an incipient exploratory stage, and all retrieved studies were mostly proofs of principle where further validation and increased sample sizes are craved for. Whereas results for all explored diseases are inconsistent, we believe this reflects the need for concerted, multisite data collection efforts with a strong focus on measuring the generalizability of results. Finally, whereas functional MRI is the best way of measuring brain function available to date, its low signal-to-noise ratio and elevated monetary cost make it a poor clinical alternative. Even with technology progressing and costs decreasing, this might incentivize the search for more accessible, clinically ready functional proxies in the future.
34744804|a|Background: Previous studies have identified differentially expressed microRNAs in autism spectrum disorder (ASD), however, results are discrepant. We aimed to systematically review this topic and perform bioinformatic analysis to identify genes and pathways associated with ASD miRNAs. Methods: Following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses, we searched the Web of Science, PubMed, Embase, Scopus, and OVID databases to identify all studies comparing microRNA expressions between ASD persons and non-ASD controls on May 11, 2020. We obtained ASD miRNA targets validated by experimental assays from miRTarBase and performed pathway enrichment analysis using Metascape and DIANA-miRPath v3. 0. Results: Thirty-four studies were included in the systematic review. Among 285 altered miRNAs reported in these studies, 15 were consistently upregulated, 14 were consistently downregulated, and 39 were inconsistently dysregulated. The most frequently altered miRNAs including miR-23a-3p, miR-106b-5p, miR-146a-5p, miR-7-5p, miR-27a-3p, miR-181b-5p, miR-486-3p, and miR-451a. Subgroup analysis of tissues showed that miR-146a-5p, miR-155-5p, miR-1277-3p, miR-21-3p, miR-106b-5p, and miR-451a were consistently upregulated in brain tissues, while miR-4742-3p was consistently downregulated; miR-23b-3p, miR-483-5p, and miR-23a-3p were consistently upregulated in blood samples, while miR-15a-5p, miR-193a-5p, miR-20a-5p, miR-574-3p, miR-92a-3p, miR-3135a, and miR-103a-3p were consistently downregulated; miR-7-5p was consistently upregulated in saliva, miR-23a-3p and miR-32-5p were consistently downregulated. The altered ASD miRNAs identified in at least two independent studies were validated to target many autism risk genes. TNRC6B, PTEN, AGO1, SKI, and SMAD4 were the most frequent targets, and miR-92a-3p had the most target autism risk genes. Pathway enrichment analysis showed that ASD miRNAs are significantly involved in pathways associated with cancer, metabolism (notably Steroid biosynthesis, Fatty acid metabolism, Fatty acid biosynthesis, Lysine degradation, Biotin metabolism), cell cycle, cell signaling (especially Hippo, FoxO, TGF-beta, p53, Thyroid hormone, and Estrogen signaling pathway), adherens junction, extracellular matrix-receptor interaction, and Prion diseases. Conclusions: Altered miRNAs in ASD target autism risk genes and are involved in various ASD-related pathways, some of which are understudied and require further investigation.
34744690|a|Structural and functional integrity of the cerebral vasculature ensures proper brain development and function, as well as healthy aging. The inability of the brain to store energy makes it exceptionally dependent on an adequate supply of oxygen and nutrients from the blood stream for matching colossal demands of neural and glial cells. Key vascular features including a dense vasculature, a tightly controlled environment, and the regulation of cerebral blood flow (CBF) all take part in brain health throughout life. As such, healthy brain development and aging are both ensured by the anatomical and functional interaction between the vascular and nervous systems that are established during brain development and maintained throughout the lifespan. During critical periods of brain development, vascular networks remodel until they can actively respond to increases in neural activity through neurovascular coupling, which makes the brain particularly vulnerable to neurovascular alterations. The brain vasculature has been strongly associated with the onset and/or progression of conditions associated with aging, and more recently with neurodevelopmental disorders. Our understanding of cerebrovascular contributions to neurological disorders is rapidly evolving, and increasing evidence shows that deficits in angiogenesis, CBF and the blood-brain barrier (BBB) are causally linked to cognitive impairment. Moreover, it is of utmost curiosity that although neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders express different clinical features at different stages of life, they share similar vascular abnormalities. In this review, we present an overview of vascular dysfunctions associated with neurodevelopmental (autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia, Down Syndrome) and neurodegenerative (multiple sclerosis, Huntington's, Parkinson's, and Alzheimer's diseases) disorders, with a focus on impairments in angiogenesis, CBF and the BBB. Finally, we discuss the impact of early vascular impairments on the expression of neurodegenerative diseases.
34744648|a|The brainstem includes many nuclei and fiber tracts that mediate a wide range of functions. Data from two parallel approaches to the study of autistic spectrum disorder (ASD) implicate many brainstem structures. The first approach is to identify the functions affected in ASD and then trace the neural systems mediating those functions. While not included as core symptoms, three areas of function are frequently impaired in ASD: (1) Motor control both of the limbs and body and the control of eye movements; (2) Sensory information processing in vestibular and auditory systems; (3) Control of affect. There are critical brainstem nuclei mediating each of those functions. There are many nuclei critical for eye movement control including the superior colliculus. Vestibular information is first processed in the four nuclei of the vestibular nuclear complex. Auditory information is relayed to the dorsal and ventral cochlear nuclei and subsequently processed in multiple other brainstem nuclei. Critical structures in affect regulation are the brainstem sources of serotonin and norepinephrine, the raphe nuclei and the locus ceruleus. The second approach is the analysis of abnormalities from direct study of ASD brains. The structure most commonly identified as abnormal in neuropathological studies is the cerebellum. It is classically a major component of the motor system, critical for coordination. It has also been implicated in cognitive and language functions, among the core symptoms of ASD. This structure works very closely with the cerebral cortex; the cortex and the cerebellum show parallel enlargement over evolution. The cerebellum receives input from cortex via relays in the pontine nuclei. In addition, climbing fiber input to cerebellum comes from the inferior olive of the medulla. Mossy fiber input comes from the arcuate nucleus of the medulla as well as the pontine nuclei. The cerebellum projects to several brainstem nuclei including the vestibular nuclear complex and the red nucleus. There are thus multiple brainstem nuclei distributed at all levels of the brainstem, medulla, pons, and midbrain, that participate in functions affected in ASD. There is direct evidence that the cerebellum may be abnormal in ASD. The evidence strongly indicates that analysis of these structures could add to our understanding of the neural basis of ASD.
34744609|a|In recent years, the idea of the gut microbiota being involved in the pathogenesis of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) has attracted attention through numerous studies. Many of these studies report microbial dysregulation in the gut and feces of autistic patients and in ASD animal models. The host microbiota plays a large role in metabolism of ingested foods, and through the production of a range of metabolites it may be involved in neurodevelopmental disorders such as ASD. Two specific microbiota-derived host metabolites, p-cresol sulfate and 4-ethylphenyl sulfate, have been associated with ASD in both patients and animal models. These metabolites originate from bacterially produced p-cresol and 4-ethylphenol, respectively. p-Cresol and 4-ethylphenol are produced through aromatic amino acid fermentation by a range of commensal bacteria, most notably bacteria from the Clostridioides genus, which are among the dysregulated bacteria frequently detected in ASD patients. Once produced, these metabolites are suggested to enter the bloodstream, pass the blood-brain-barrier and affect microglial cells in the central nervous system, possibly affecting processes like neuroinflammation and microglial phagocytosis. This review describes the current knowledge of microbial dysbiosis in ASD and elaborates on the relevance and synthesis pathways of two specific ASD-associated metabolites that may form a link between the microbiota and the brain in autism. While the two discussed metabolites are promising candidates for biomarkers and (nutritional) intervention targets, more research into the role of these metabolites in ASD is required to causally connect these metabolites to ASD pathophysiology.
34744608|a|Background: Alexithymia is a multifaceted personality construct defined by marked difficulties in identifying and describing feelings and in externally oriented thinking. Given its intrinsic role in social-emotional processing, alexithymia is now recognized as a trans-diagnostic trait in a range of neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism. Research has pinpointed to the co-occurrence of autism with characteristics typical of alexithymic normative samples, such as social-communication difficulties and decreased emotion regulation abilities. Nonetheless, the role of individual facets of alexithymia in predicting challenges in social communication functioning is still understudied. Methods: In total, 275 young adults completed the Toronto Alexithymia Scale, the Autism Spectrum Quotient (short form), the Interpersonal Competence Questionnaire, and the Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale self-reported questionnaires for assessing alexithymic and autistic traits, social-communication abilities, and emotion regulation difficulties. We used regression models to establish cross-sectional associations between autism, alexithymia, and social-emotional difficulties. Also, we ran a parallel mediation analysis to determine whether the relationship between autistic traits and emotion regulations challenges are mediated by Alexithymia facets. Results: Analysis showed a significant positive association between autistic traits and alexithymic traits and between autistic traits and emotion regulation difficulties while, as expected, autistic traits were negatively correlated with social skills. A significant relationship was found among the participants' levels of alexithymia and their interpersonal skills with two of three alexithymic subscales significantly contributing to the model. Similarly, a significant relationship was found among alexithymia subscales and emotion regulation difficulties with all three alexithymia subscales being statistically significant. Finally, analysis on two mediator models indicated a significant effect of autistic traits on social skills mediated by alexithymic traits as well as a significant indirect effect of autistic traits on emotion regulation difficulties mediated by alexithymic traits. Conclusion: The results of this study provide evidence of the influence of different alexithymic facets on the relationship between autistic traits and social-emotional challenges in young adults. Longitudinal studies may explore further alexithymia and its associations with social-emotional difficulties in autism as well as the potential implications of these findings in intervention and treatment programs.
34744607|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a specific brain disease that causes communication impairments and restricted interests. Functional connectivity analysis methodology is widely used in neuroscience research and shows much potential in discriminating ASD patients from healthy controls. However, due to heterogeneity of ASD patients, the performance of conventional functional connectivity classification methods is relatively poor. Graph neural network is an effective graph representation method to model structured data like functional connectivity. In this paper, we proposed a functional graph discriminative network (FGDN) for ASD classification. On the basis of pre-built graph templates, the proposed FGDN is able to effectively distinguish ASD patient from health controls. Moreover, we studied the size of training set for effective training, inter-site predictions, and discriminative brain regions. Discriminative brain regions were determined by the proposed model to investigate its applicability and biomarkers for ASD identification. For functional connectivity classification and analysis, FGDN is not only an effective tool for ASD identification but also a potential technique in neuroscience research.
34744483|a|The Therapeutic Alliance (TA) between patient and health provider (therapist or clinician) is one of the most relevant factors for the success of a therapy. In the case of people suffering from Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), the alliance is extended to all the people involved in their care (i.e., teachers, therapists, clinicians, relatives). In this paper, we propose a multimedia application named Thea for empowering the TA of children with ASD by improving the communication among the TA members, sharing guidelines, multimedia contents, and strategies to comply with challenging behaviors and progress with particular attention towards end-users who are occasional smart-users. A detailed process for empowering the TA members by enhancing the informed interaction among all of them is proposed and implemented. A vocal assistant also supports patients/caregivers and therapists in documenting their activity with the person with ASD by recording videos in a free-hand modality. After a contextual analysis based on Thematic Analysis Template, Thea has been implemented using a user-centered development approach. We performed three iterations involving the end-users. A user study is performed at the third iteration. Results of the user study revealed a positive attitude towards the application. In particular, the perception of empowerment of participants increased after the tool had been used. We also highlighted the guidelines and tools that may be adopted for empowering different kinds of patients. The first results seem to suggest that the use of Thea may increase the belief of the caregivers of a person with ASD to be able to better take care of her, in a more controlled and informed way.
34744317|a|One in 12 children is born before 37 completed weeks of gestation and during the last decades survival rates and developmental outcomes of even very premature children have significantly improved. As a result, mental health sequelae of preterm birth are more frequently addressed. The manifestation of a distinct psychopathological profile with co-occurrence of symptoms associated with attention deficit/hyperactivity, autism spectrum and anxiety disorders has been recognized and discussed as "preterm behavioral phenotype", mainly affecting high-risk children with very low birth weights. Current research findings on parental psychological distress and early childhood developmental conditions after preterm birth indicate contextual factors that are of relevance, also for clinicians in psychotherapeutic practice.
34744001|a|Evidence demonstrates that psychiatric disorders during pregnancy are detrimental to the offspring. Many disorders are treated with SSRIs and increasing numbers of pregnant women now receive these drugs during gestation. The long-term neurobehavioral consequences of prenatal SSRI exposure require further evaluation. This study examined the effects of prenatal fluoxetine exposure in mice in an extensive battery of behaviors related to neurodevelopment, mood, social, and repetitive behaviors. C57BL/6J dams were administered fluoxetine at a low (0.6 mg/kg/day) or high (6 mg/kg/day) dose or saline from embryonic days 8 to 18. Juvenile mice were tested for changes in ultrasonic vocalizations and neuromotor development. In adulthood, offspring were tested for changes in behaviors related to anxiety, depression, social, and repetitive behaviors. Prenatal exposure to fluoxetine impaired surface righting reflex at P5, and sex-dependently reduced the frequency of ultrasonic vocalizations in juvenile males but not females. In adulthood, both males and females prenatally exposed to high, but not low, doses of fluoxetine exhibited an increase in repetitive behaviors in the marble burying task and a decrease in sucrose preference. Males, but not females, exposed to fluoxetine exhibited increased anxiety-related behaviors in the elevated plus maze. Prenatal fluoxetine exposure did not affect other adult behaviors including social preference, self-grooming, passive avoidance and open field activity. These findings suggest males are more sensitive than females to disruptions in serotonin balance during prenatal development and highlight the need for additional systematic and mechanistic studies to evaluate the impact of fluoxetine exposure during other periods of gestation.
34743638|a|Recent research has shown that the perception of biological motion may be influenced by aspects of the observer's personality. In this study, we sought to determine how participant characteristics (including demographics, response inhibition, autism spectrum quotient, empathy, social anxiety, and motion imagery) might influence the use of form and motion to identify the actor's sex in biological motion displays. We varied the degree of form and motion in biological motion displays and correlated 76 young adult participants' performances for identifying the actor's sex in these varied conditions with their individual differences on variables of interest. Differences in the separate use of form and motion cues were predictive of participant performance generally, with use of form most predictive of performance. Female participants relied primarily on form information, while male participants relied primarily on motion information. Participants less able to visualize movement tended to be better at using form information in the biological motion task. Overall, our findings suggest that similar group level performances across participants in identifying the sex of the actor in a biological motion task may result from quite different individual processing.
34742776|a|Consciousness has been hypothesized to operate as a global workspace, which accesses and integrates multimodal information in a uni_ed manner, supports expectation violation monitoring and reduction, and the motivation, programming and control of action. One important yet open issue concerns how the subjective perspective at the core of consciousness, and subjective properties of manifestation of the environment in such perspective as an embodied experience, play a role in such process. We operationalised the concept of subjective perspective using the principles of the Projective Consciousness Model (PCM), based on the projective geometrical concept of Field of Consciousness. We show how these principles can account for documented relationships between appraisal and distance as an inverse distance law, yield a generative model of a_ective and epistemic drives based on purely subjective parameters, such as the apparent size of objects, and can be generalised to implement Theory of Mind, in a manner that is consistent with simulation theory. We used simulations of arti_cial agents, based on psychological rationale, to demonstrate how different model parameters could generate a variety of emergent adaptive and maladaptive behaviours that are relevant to developmental and clinical psychology: the ability to be resilient in the face of obstacles through imaginary projections, the emergence of social approach and joint attention behaviours, the ability to take advantage of false beliefs attributed to others, the emergence of avoidance behaviours as observed in social anxiety disorders, the presence of restricted interests as observed in autism spectrum disorders. The simulation of agents was applied to a speci_c robotic context, and agents' behaviours were demonstrated by controlling the corresponding robots. Our results contribute to advance the scienti_c understanding of the causal relationships between core aspects of the phenomenology of consciousness and its functions in human cybernetics.
34742725|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a severe neurological/neurodegenerative syndrome that results in cognitive and communication disorders. The degree of dysbiosis is related to the severity of ASD signs. The gut is conferred with a variety of sensory receptors that cooperate with effector systems including the endocrine, nervous and gut immune systems of the intestine. Gut dysbiosis causes amplified inflammation, the launch of the HPA axis, changed levels of neurotransmitters and bacterial metabolites; these may donate to abnormal signaling throughout the Vagus nerve in ASD. Decreased integrity of the gastrointestinal barrier led to extreme leakage of substances as of the intestine in early life and inflammation followed by disruption of BBB integrity maybe increase the risk of ASD. Microbiota, by controlling the barrier permeability, regulate the quantity and types of bioactive materials that are transferred from the intestine to the brain. Exposure to metabolites and microbial products regulate significant procedures in the CNS, including glial cell role, myelination, synaptic pruning, and play a role in neurobehavioral, neurodegenerative, psychiatric, and metabolic syndrome.
34742689|a|Dietary fish is a rich source of omega-3 (n-3) fatty acids, and as such, is believed to have played an important role in the evolution of the human brain and its advanced cognitive function. The long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, particularly the n-3 docosahexanoic acid (DHA), are critical for proper neurological development and function. Both low plasma DHA and obesity in pregnancy are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders such as attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in childhood, and n-3 supplementation has been shown to improve symptoms, as reviewed herein. The mechanisms underlying the connection between maternal obesity, n-3 fatty acid levels and offspring's neurological outcomes are poorly understood, but we review the evidence for a mediating role of the placenta in this relationship. Despite promising data that n-3 fatty acid supplementation mitigates the effect of maternal obesity on placental lipid metabolism, few clinical trials or animal studies have considered the neurological outcomes of offspring of mothers with obesity supplemented with n-3 FA in pregnancy.
34742290|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by impairments in social interaction and restricted and repetitive behaviors. Neuroinflammation and abnormal lipid mediators have been identified in multiple investigations as an acknowledged etiological mechanism of ASD that can be targeted for therapeutic intervention. METHODS: In this study, multiple regression and combined receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analyses were used to determine the relationship between the neuroinflammatory marker alpha-synuclein and lipid mediator markers related to inflammation induction, such as cyclooxygenase-2 and prostaglandin-EP2 receptors, in the etiology of ASD. Additionally, the study aimed to determine the linear combination that maximizes the partial area under ROC curves for a set of markers. Forty children with ASD and 40 age- and sex-matched controls were enrolled in the study. Using ELISA, the levels of alpha-synuclein, cyclo-oxygenase-2, and prostaglandin-EP2 receptors were measured in the plasma of both groups. Statistical analyses using ROC curves and multiple and logistic regression models were performed. RESULTS: A remarkable increase in the area under the curve was observed using combined ROC curve analyses. Moreover, higher specificity and sensitivity of the combined markers were reported. CONCLUSIONS: The present study indicates that measurement of the predictive value of selected biomarkers related to neuroinflammation and lipid metabolism in children with ASD using a ROC curve analysis should lead to a better understanding of the etiological mechanism of ASD and its link with metabolism. This information may facilitate early diagnosis and intervention.
34741464|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is frequently associated with infants with epileptic encephalopathy, and early interventions targeting social and cognitive deficits can have positive effects on developmental outcome. However, early diagnosis of ASD among infants with epilepsy is complicated by variability in clinical phenotypes. Commonality in both biological and molecular mechanisms have been suggested between ASD and epilepsy, such as occurs with tuberous sclerosis complex. This review summarizes the current understanding of causal mechanisms between epilepsy and ASD, with a particularly genetic focus. Hypothetical explanations to support the conjugation of the two conditions include abnormalities in synaptic growth, imbalance in neuronal excitation/inhibition, and abnormal synaptic plasticity. Investigation of the probable genetic basis has implemented many genes, although the main risk supports existing hypotheses in that these cluster to abnormalities in ion channels, synaptic function and structure, and transcription regulators, with the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway and "mTORpathies" having been a notable research focus. Experimental models not only have a crucial role in determining gene functions but are also useful instruments for tracing disease trajectory. Precision medicine from gene therapy remains a theoretical possibility, but more contemporary developments continue in molecular tests to aid earlier diagnoses and better therapeutic targeting.
34741438|a|Commercially available wearable biosensors have the potential to enhance psychophysiology research and digital health technologies for autism by enabling stress or arousal monitoring in naturalistic settings. However, such monitors may not be comfortable for children with autism due to sensory sensitivities. To determine the feasibility of wearable technology in children with autism age 8-12 years, we first selected six consumer-grade wireless cardiovascular monitors and tested them during rest and movement conditions in 23 typically developing adults. Subsequently, the best performing monitors (based on data quality robustness statistics), Polar and Mio Fuse, were evaluated in 32 children with autism and 23 typically developing children during a 2-h session, including rest and mild stress-inducing tasks. Cardiovascular data were recorded simultaneously across monitors using custom software. We administered the Comfort Rating Scales to children. Although the Polar monitor was less comfortable for children with autism than typically developing children, absolute scores demonstrated that, on average, all children found each monitor comfortable. For most children, data from the Mio Fuse (96%-100%) and Polar (83%-96%) passed quality thresholds of data robustness. Moreover, in the stress relative to rest condition, heart rate increased for the Polar, F(1,53) = 135.70, p < 0.001, etap2  = 0.78, and Mio Fuse, F(1,53) = 71.98, p < 0.001, etap2  = 0.61, respectively, and heart rate variability decreased for the Polar, F(1,53) = 13.41, p = 0.001, etap2  = 0.26, and Mio Fuse, F(1,53) = 8.89, p = 0.005, etap2  = 0.16, respectively. This feasibility study suggests that select consumer-grade wearable cardiovascular monitors can be used with children with autism and may be a promising means for tracking physiological stress or arousal responses in community settings. LAY SUMMARY: Commercially available heart rate trackers have the potential to advance stress research with individuals with autism. Due to sensory sensitivities common in autism, their comfort wearing such trackers is vital to gathering robust and valid data. After assessing six trackers with typically developing adults, we tested the best trackers (based on data quality) in typically developing children and children with autism and found that two of them met criteria for comfort, robustness, and validity.
34741402|a|Joint hypermobility (JHM), defined as an increased range of joint motion, is a frequent somatic trait in the general population but also the hallmark of many of the hereditary disorders of connective tissue. Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) belong to this group of diseases and are characterized by tissue fragility, skin abnormalities, and JHM. Between JHM and EDS, there are the so-called hypermobility spectrum disorders (HSD), which is an umbrella term referring to people with symptomatic JHM who do not fulfill criteria for a syndromic connective tissue disorder such as EDS. Among the variety of clinical correlates of JHM/HSD/EDS, neurodevelopmental atypisms are common although often not screened for and identified in the clinical setting. This article reviews the pertinent literature concerning neurodevelopmental conditions for which there is some evidence of an association with JHM/HSD/EDS. These include hyperactivity and attention deficit, learning, communication, and motor problems including tic disorders such as Tourette syndrome and autism spectrum disorders. Underlying mechanism hypotheses for such interconnections are also reviewed. The coexistence of connective tissue-altered conditions and neurodevelopmental atypisms increases disability in patients from an early age. Thus, increased awareness among clinicians and researchers is necessary to promote assessment, diagnosis, and develop management strategies to meet the specific needs of those affected.
34741233|a|Autism spectrum disorders are diagnosed globally, but recognition, interpretation and reporting may vary across cultures. To compare autism across cultures it is important to investigate whether the tools used are conceptually equivalent across cultures. This study evaluated the factor structure of the parent-reported Autism Spectrum Quotient Short Form in autistic children from China (n = 327; 3 to 17 years) and the Netherlands (n = 694; 6 to 16 years). Confirmatory factor analysis did not support the two-factor hierarchical model previously identified. Exploratory factor analysis indicated culturally variant factor structures between China and the Netherlands, which may hamper cross-cultural comparisons. Several items loaded onto different factors in the two samples, indicating substantial variation in parent-reported autistic traits between China and the Netherlands.
34741232|a|Loneliness has been associated with several adverse psychosocial outcomes in childhood and adolescence. The present study aimed to investigate feelings of loneliness and social dissatisfaction in school-aged typically-developing (TD) siblings of children with an autism spectrum disorder (ASD). For this purpose, 118 siblings of children with ASD and 115 siblings of TD children and one of their parents participated in this study. Siblings of ASD-children reported higher levels of loneliness and social dissatisfaction than the controls. The hierarchical multiple regressions performed revealed that those feelings were inversely associated with being the first-born and with specific aspects of social support as perceived by the parent. The younger siblings of ASD-children seem to be in need of certain interventions beyond social support.
34741005|a|Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are caused by a combination of genetic predisposition and nongenetic factors. Among the nongenetic factors, maternal immune system activation and zinc deficiency have been proposed. Intriguingly, as a genetic factor, copy-number variations in S100B, a pro-inflammatory damage-associated molecular pattern (DAMP), have been associated with ASD, and increased serum S100B has been found in ASD. Interestingly, it has been shown that increased S100B levels affect zinc homeostasis in vitro. Thus, here, we investigated the influence of increased S100B levels in vitro and in vivo during pregnancy in mice regarding zinc availability, the zinc-sensitive SHANK protein networks associated with ASD, and behavioral outcomes. We observed that S100B affects the synaptic SHANK2 and SHANK3 levels in a zinc-dependent manner, especially early in neuronal development. Animals exposed to high S100B levels in utero similarly show reduced levels of free zinc and SHANK2 in the brain. On the behavioral level, these mice display hyperactivity, increased stereotypic and abnormal social behaviors, and cognitive impairment. Pro-inflammatory factors and zinc-signaling alterations converge on the synaptic level revealing a common pathomechanism that may mechanistically explain a large share of ASD cases.
34740964|a|
34740315|a|BACKGROUND: Phelan McDermid syndrome (PMS) is a neurogenetic condition associated with a high prevalence of intellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). This study provides a more comprehensive and quantitative profile of repetitive behaviors within the context of ID seen with the condition. METHODS: Individuals age 3-21 years with a confirmed PMS diagnosis participated in a multicenter observational study evaluating the phenotype and natural history of the disorder. We evaluated data collected from this study pertaining to repetitive behaviors from the Repetitive Behavior Scales-Revised (RBS-R). RESULTS: There were n = 90 participants who were part of this analysis. Forty-seven percent (n = 42/90) were female, and the average age at baseline evaluation was 8.88 +- 4.72 years. The mean best estimate IQ of the cohort was 26.08 +- 17.67 (range = 3.4-88), with n = 8 with mild ID (or no ID), n = 20 with moderate ID, and n = 62 with severe-profound ID. The RBS-R total overall score was 16.46 +- 13.9 (compared to 33.14 +- 20.60 reported in previous studies of ASD) (Lam and Aman, 2007), and the total number of items endorsed was 10.40 +- 6.81 (range = 0-29). After statistical correction for multiple comparisons, IQ correlated with the RBS-R stereotypic behavior subscale score (rs = - 0.33, unadjusted p = 0.0014, adjusted p = 0.01) and RBS-R stereotypic behavior total number of endorsed items (rs = - 0.32, unadjusted p = 0.0019, adjusted p = 0.01). IQ did not correlate with any other RBS-R subscale scores. CONCLUSIONS: The RBS-R total overall score in a PMS cohort appears milder compared to individuals with ASD characterized in previous studies. Stereotypic behavior in PMS may reflect cognitive functioning.
34740217|a|OBJECTIVE: Pediatric patients with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) often have coexisting feeding disorders. We hope to emphasize the significant implications that these feeding disorders can have on this patient population through a unique case of hypokalemia-induced rhabdomyolysis. METHOD: We present a unique case of a 3-year-old boy with ASD and a longstanding history of food selectivity whose routine was disrupted during the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder and severe undernutrition, who presented with profound hypokalemia and was subsequently found to have elevated muscle enzymes consistent with rhabdomyolysis despite only subtle complaints of difficulty walking. RESULTS: The patient was treated with aggressive hydration, electrolyte therapy, and nasogastric tube feeds, which resulted in clinical and biochemical evidence of improvement. He was also reconnected to ASD-related care services that had lapsed during the COVID-19 pandemic. CONCLUSION: This case exemplifies the adverse impact that feeding disorders can have on patients with ASD, particularly in the setting of stressors such as a global pandemic, and is also the first documented pediatric case of rhabdomyolysis secondary to hypokalemia from severe undernutrition. It demonstrates that physicians should have a low threshold to assess for clinical and laboratory evidence of rhabdomyolysis in patients with profound hypokalemia because symptoms of hypokalemia-induced rhabdomyolysis can often be subtle, which can delay diagnosis and thereby increase the risk for life-threatening complications from extensive muscle damage.
34740214|a|CASE SECTION: Zoe is a 25-month-old girl who presented to developmental-behavioral pediatrics with her parents for follow-up after receiving a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder with global developmental delay and language impairment 3 months ago. Zoe was born by spontaneous vaginal delivery at term after an uncomplicated pregnancy, labor, and delivery. She had a routine newborn course and was discharged home with her parents 2 days after her birth.At 7 months, Zoe was not able to sit independently, had poor weight gain, and had hypertonia on physical examination. Her parents described her to tense her arms and have hand tremors when she held her bottle during feedings and reported that she had resisted their attempts to introduce pureed or other age-appropriate table foods into her diet. The Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development Screening Test was administered and found a cognitive composite score of 70, language composite score of 65, and motor composite score of 67. Chromosomal microarray analysis, testing for fragile X syndrome, laboratory studies for metabolic disorders, magnetic resonance imaging of the brain, and an audiologic examination were normal. Zoe was referred to and received early intervention services including physical therapy, feeding therapy, and infant stimulation services. By 16 months, Zoe was walking independently and was gaining weight well but continued to have sensory aversions to some foods.At 22 months, Zoe was evaluated by a multidisciplinary team because of ongoing developmental concerns and concerning results on standardized screening for autism spectrum disorder completed at her 18-month preventive care visit. Her parents also reported concern about the possibility of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) because they both were diagnosed with ASD as young children. Both parents completed college and were employed full-time. Zoe's mother seemed to be somewhat anxious during the visit and provided fleeting eye contact throughout the evaluation. Zoe's father was assertive, but polite, and was the primary historian regarding parental concerns during the evaluation.Zoe was noted to have occasional hand flapping and squealing vocalizations while she roamed the examination area grabbing various objects and casting them to the floor while watching the trajectory of their movements. She did not use a single-finger point to indicate her wants or needs and did not initiate or follow joint attention. She met criteria for ASD. In discussing the diagnosis with Zoe's parents, they shared that they were not surprised by the diagnosis. They expressed feeling that Zoe was social and playful, although delayed in her language. Hence, they were more concerned about her disinterest in eating. They were not keen on behavioral intervention because they did not want Zoe to be "trained to be neurotypical." Although the mother did not receive applied behavior analysis (ABA), the father had received ABA for 3 years beginning at age 5 years. He believed that ABA negatively changed his personality, and he did not want the same for Zoe.How would you assist Zoe's parents in identification of priorities for her developmental care while ensuring respect for their perspective of neurodiversity?
34740135|a|BACKGROUND: Semaphorins and plexins are ligands and cell surface receptors that regulate multiple neurodevelopmental processes such as axonal growth and guidance. PLXNA3 is a plexin gene located on the X chromosome that encodes the most widely expressed plexin receptor in fetal brain, plexin-A3. Plexin-A3 knockout mice demonstrate its role in semaphorin signaling in vivo. The clinical manifestations of semaphorin/plexin neurodevelopmental disorders have been less widely explored. This study describes the neurological and neurodevelopmental phenotypes of boys with maternally inherited hemizygous PLXNA3 variants. METHODS: Data-sharing through GeneDx and GeneMatcher allowed identification of individuals with autism or intellectual disabilities (autism/ID) and hemizygous PLXNA3 variants in collaboration with their physicians and genetic counselors, who completed questionnaires about their patients. In silico analyses predicted pathogenicity for each PLXNA3 variant. RESULTS: We assessed 14 boys (mean age, 10.7 [range 2 to 25] years) with maternally inherited hemizygous PLXNA3 variants and autism/ID ranging from mild to severe. Other findings included fine motor dyspraxia (92%), attention-deficit/hyperactivity traits, and aggressive behaviors (63%). Six patients (43%) had seizures. Thirteen boys (93%) with PLXNA3 variants showed novel or very low allele frequencies and probable damaging/disease-causing pathogenicity in one or more predictors. We found a genotype-phenotype correlation between PLXNA3 cytoplasmic domain variants (exons 22 to 32) and more severe neurodevelopmental disorder phenotypes (P < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: We report 14 boys with maternally inherited, hemizygous PLXNA3 variants and a range of neurodevelopmental disorders suggesting a novel X-linked intellectual disability syndrome. Greater understanding of PLXNA3 variant pathogenicity in humans will require additional clinical, computational, and experimental validation.
34740134|a|BACKGROUND: Sleep problems are a prevalent comorbidity in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) with a multifactorial basis in which circadian misalignment has been described. METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted including 52 children and adolescents with ASD (9.85 +- 3.07) and 27 children and adolescent controls with normal intellectual functioning (8.81 +- 2.14). They were matched for age, sex, and body mass index, and all were drug-naive. An ambulatory circadian monitoring device was used to record temperature and motor, body position, sleep, and light intensity. RESULTS: Individuals with ASD presented longer sleep-onset latency, lower sleep efficiency, and decreased total sleep time and tended to be more sedentary and have less exposure to light. They also showed lower amplitude, low interdaily stability, and a different pattern of wrist temperature across the day, with a midpoint of sleep that did not concur with sleep midpoint indicated by the rest of circadian parameters. CONCLUSIONS: The sleep problems observed in this sample resemble those reported previously, with the exception of nocturnal awakenings which did not show differences. The ambulatory circadian monitoring device enabled measurement of circadian parameters such as temperature which, until now, were scarcely described in children with ASD and could be used to better understand sleep and circadian system in ASD.
34739646|a|This study aimed to explore the rates of motor difficulties in children from the Australian Autism Biobank, and how early motor concerns impacted on children functionally. Children with autism aged 2-7 years, including 441 with a Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale (VABS-II) motor subscale and 385 with a Mullen Scales of Early Learning (MSEL) fine motor subscale were included (n total = 514; 80% male). Approximately 60% of children on the MSEL and ~ 25% on the VABS-II had clinically significant motor impairments. More children with delayed sitting and walking motor milestones had early childhood parent reported motor difficulties (p < 0.001). Early motor delays or concerns may assist identifying individuals who will likely benefit from early ongoing developmental monitoring and early support.
34739645|a|
34739555|a|Haploinsufficiency in SYNGAP1 is implicated in intellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and affects the maturation of dendritic spines. The abnormal spine development has been suggested to cause a disbalance of excitatory and inhibitory (E/I) neurotransmission at distinct developmental periods. In addition, E/I imbalances in Syngap1+/- mice might be due to abnormalities in K+-Cl- co-transporter function (NKCC1, KCC2), in a maner similar to the murine models of Fragile-X and Rett syndromes. To study whether an altered intracellular chloride ion concentration represents an underlying mechanism of modified function of GABAergic synapses in Dentate Gyrus Granule Cells of Syngap1+/- recordings were performed at different developmental stages of the mice. We observed depolarised neurons at P14-15 as illustrated by decreased Cl- reversal potential in Syngap1+/- mice. The KCC2 expression was decreased compared to Wild-type (WT) mice at P14-15. The GSK-3beta inhibitor, 6-bromoindirubin-3'-oxime (6BIO) that crosses the blood-brain barrier, was tested to restore the function of GABAergic synapses. We discovered that the intraperitoneal administration of 6BIO during the critical period or young adolescents [P30 to P80 (4-week to 10-week)] normalised an altered E/I balance, the deficits of synaptic plasticity, and behavioural performance like social novelty, anxiety, and memory of the Syngap1+/- mice. In summary, altered GABAergic function in Syngap1+/- mice is due to reduced KCC2 expression leading to an increase in the intracellular chloride concentration that can be counteracted by the 6BIO, which restored cognitive, emotional, and social symptoms by pharmacological intervention, particularly in adulthood.
34739429|a|OBJECTIVE: To determine outcomes following cochlear implantation (CI) in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). DATABASES REVIEWED: MEDLINE, Embase, Web of science, Cochrane Library, and Clinicaltrial.gov. METHODS: The review was performed according to the PRISMA statement. Primary outcomes measures were changes in speech perception and speech production scores. Secondary outcome measures included communication mode, device use, parental recommendation of implant, postoperative hyperacusis, and quality of life measures. Pooled analysis of outcomes was performed if possible. RESULTS: Twenty-four studies reported on 159 children with ASD. There were improvements in speech perception in 78% of cases and in speech expression in 63% of cases, though the extent of this improvement was variable. Seventy-four percent of children with ASD and CI are nonoral communicators. Intermittent/nonuse rate was 31%. Hearing outcomes are worse compared to children with other disabilities. The vast majority of parents would recommend CI based on their experiences. CONCLUSION: Outcome in children with ASD and CI are highly variable and significantly poorer compared to non-ASD children. Despite this, most parents report positive experiences and the evidence supports the use of CI in children with ASD.
34738679|a|Adults on the autism spectrum are affected by health disparities which significantly reduce life expectancy and experience barriers to accessing healthcare. Social prescribing is a holistic approach that diverts patients from primary care to health-enhancing activities in communities. However, there has been a lack of research attention to how autistic people navigate the social prescribing pathway and the ability of these approaches to address existing disparities. This mapping review aimed to synthesise features of non-medical, community-based interventions for autistic adults to assess their suitability for a social prescribing approach. A systematic search and screening process was used to identify literature reviews from medical databases (Embase, Medline, PsycINFO, CINAHL and Cochrane reviews) and grey literature. We extracted data from 24 reviews and 19 studies including types of services, participants, outcomes, settings and procedures. A narrative and visual synthesis is used to map the variety of services and interventions identified, the outcome measures used, and the barriers and facilitators to progression through services in relation to a realist social prescribing framework. The review found that there has been minimal evaluation of holistic, low intensity services for autistic adults, such as those offered in social prescribing approaches. Outcome measures remain focused on features of autism and reveal less about the effects of interventions on health and wellbeing. Aspects of the social prescribing model were identified in the features of service pathways, but findings also suggested how social prescribing could be adapted to improve accessibility for autistic people.
34738663|a|Indoor air pollution is a recognized risk factor for a range of negative health outcomes. This study aimed to investigate the association between maternal prenatal exposure to indoor air pollution and the presence of autistic-like behaviors among preschool children. Data were obtained from the Longhua Child Cohort Study in 2017, in which we enrolled a total of 65 317 preschool children. Associations between maternal exposure to four sources of indoor air pollution (e.g., cooking, environmental tobacco smoke (ETS), mosquito coils, and home decoration) during pregnancy and preschool children's autistic traits were analyzed using multivariate logistic regression. Our results showed that maternal exposure to indoor air pollution from four different sources during pregnancy was associated with the presence of children's autistic-like behaviors. There was dose-response relationship between the accumulative exposure to the four different indoor air pollution sources and the risk of autistic-like behaviors. Furthermore, we found a significant additive interaction between prenatal exposure to both cooking and mosquito coil incense on the risk of autistic-like behaviors. Maternal prenatal exposure to the indoor air pollution from four sources might increase with the risk of autistic-like behaviors being present among preschool children, with an additive interaction effect between some pollution sources.
34738360|a|BACKGROUND: Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) may present with a delay in social and communication development, or less frequently, with regression in social and language skills. The reasons for this difference in clinical presentation are unknown, and the regressive symptoms in the second group suggest an acquired process. METHODS: We investigated serum autoantibodies in these two types of ASD in a cross-sectional design in a total of 50 children, 24 with autistic regression and 26 with classical ASD according to the DSM-5 criteria. Clinical assessment by the Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) and Ankara Developmental Screening Test (ADST), parental questionnaires consisting of the Aberrant Behavior Checklist (ABC) and Autism Behavior Checklist (AuBC) were completed. Serum samples were tested for anti-neuronal antibodies including anti-N-methyl-Daspartate receptor (NMDAR), anti-contactin-associated protein (CASPR2), anti-leucine rich glioma inactivated 1 (LG1), anti-glutamate type 2-amino-3-propionic Acid (AMPA) 1-2, anti-gamma amino butyric acid (GABA) B, anti-dipeptidyl aminopeptidase-like protein 6 (DPPX) and anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase 65(GAD). RESULTS: Serum anti-GAD antibodies were at detectable levels in five (20.8%) patients with autistic regression, of whom three had 2 to 4-fold increased titers, and in none of the patients with classical ASD. The age of the father at the patient`s birth and the duration of autistic regression correlated with anti-GAD IgG levels (P: 0,045, P: 0.855 respectively) in the ASD-regression group. No other antibodies were detected in either group. CONCLUSIONS: Our results do not suggest a causative role of anti-neuronal antibodies, but the possibility of an autoimmune process accompanying regressive symptoms in a small subgroup of ASD.
34738359|a|BACKGROUND: There is increased awareness regarding the co-occurrence of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and inherited metabolic disorders (IMD), and this is crucial for the management of both diagnoses in clinical practice. We aimed firstly to report twenty-two patients with a dual diagnosis of IMD and ASD who are still being followed up in the child metabolism outpatient clinic; secondly to evaluate the time of both IMD and ASD diagnosis and the clinical progress of their metabolic disorders to underline treatable conditions. METHODS: Among the patients admitted to the Pediatric Metabolism outpatient clinic because of IMD, twentytwo of them who had a diagnosis of ASD were included in the study. Data of the patients were collected from their medical records. The most recent progress of the patients concerning their metabolic disorder was obtained from the patients` files. RESULTS: Six cases with Phenylketonuria, 2 cases with partial Biotinidase Deficiency, 3 cases with Cerebral Creatine Deficiency Syndrome (CCDS), 5 cases with Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) Type-3b, 2 cases with MPS Type-3a, 1 case with MPS Type 4, 2 cases with Hypervalinemia and 1 case with Maple Syrup Urine Disease were all diagnosed as also having ASD. The diagnoses of CCDS and MPS Type 3 were after the diagnosis of ASD. Phenylketonuria and Mucopolysaccharidosis were the most common diagnoses in our study. In addition, rare entities such as MPS Type 3b and Type 4 and Hypervalinemia were also reported to co-occur with autism. CONCLUSIONS: Considering the co-occurrence of both disorders and implementing intervention strategies accordingly will certainly be beneficial in clinical practice and particularly in countries with a high rate of consanguinity.
34737978|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a severe brain development disorder that is characterized by deficits in social communication and restricted, repetitive and stereotyped behaviors. Accumulating evidence has suggested that gut microbiota disorders play important roles in gastrointestinal symptoms and neurodevelopmental dysfunction in ASD patients. Manipulation of the gut microbiota by fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) was recently shown to be a promising therapy for the treatment of various diseases. Here, we performed a clinical trial to evaluate the effect of FMT on gastrointestinal (GI) and ASD symptoms and gut microbiota alterations in children with ASD. We found that there was a large difference in baseline characteristics of behavior, GI symptoms, and gut microbiota between children with ASD and typically developing (TD) control children. FMT could improve GI symptoms and ASD symptoms without inducing any severe complications. Similarly, FMT significantly changed the serum levels of neurotransmitters. We further observed that FMT could promote the colonization of donor microbes and shift the bacterial community of children with ASD toward that of TD controls. The abundance of Eubacterium coprostanoligenes pre-FMT was positively correlated with high GSRS scores, whereas a decrease in Eubacterium coprostanoligenes abundance induced by FMT was associated with the FMT response. Our data suggest that FMT might be a promising therapeutic strategy to improve the GI and behavioral symptoms of patients with ASD, possibly due to its ability to alter gut microbiota and highlight a specific microbiota intervention that targets Eubacterium coprostanoligenes that can enhance the FMT response. This trial was registered at the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (www.chictr.org.cn) (trial registration number ChiCTR1800014745).
34737764|a|Background Despite psychiatric traits were associated with intracranial aneurysms (IAs) in observational studies, their causal relationships remain largely undefined. We aimed to assess the causality between psychiatric traits and IAs. Methods We firstly collected the genome-wide association statistics of IAs (sample size, n = 79,429) and ten psychiatric traits from Europeans, including insomnia (n = 1,331,010), mood instability (n = 363,705), anxiety disorder (n = 83,566), major depressive disorder (MDD) (n = 480,359), subjective wellbeing (n = 388,538), attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (n = 53,293), autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (n = 46,350), bipolar disorder (BIP) (n = 51,710), schizophrenia (SCZ) (n = 105,318), and neuroticism (n = 168,105). We then conducted a series of bi-directional two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) analyses, of which the Robust Adjusted Profile Score (RAPS) was the primary method to estimate the causal effects between these psychiatric traits and IAs. Results We found that insomnia exhibited a significant risk effect on IAs with the odds ratio (OR) being 1.22 (95% CI: 1.11-1.34, p = 4.61 x 10-5) from the RAPS method. There was suggestive evidence for risk effect of mood instability on IAs (RAPS, OR = 4.16, 95% CI: 1.02-17.00, p = 0.047). However, no clear evidence of causal effects on IAs for the rest eight psychiatric traits (anxiety disorder, MDD, subjective wellbeing, ADHD, ASD, BIP, SCZ, and neuroticism) was identified. In the reverse MR analyses, no causal effects of IAs on psychiatric traits were found. Conclusions Our findings provide strong evidence for a causal risk effect of insomnia on IAs and suggestive evidence for mood instability as a causal risk effect on IAs. These results could inform the prevention and clinical intervention of IAs.
34737666|a|Purpose: This study aimed to investigate the associations of the traits of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) with depression and empathy among medical students. Patients and Methods: A cross-sectional survey was conducted with 202 fifth-year students at a Japanese medical school for 10 months during their clinical clerkship. The survey included sociodemographic questions and validated tools to measure depressive symptoms (Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale [HADS]), medical students' empathy for patients (Jefferson Scale of Empathy-Student version [JSE]), ADHD traits (ADHD Self-Report Scale Screener [ASRS Screener]), and ASD traits (Autism-Spectrum Quotient Japanese version-21 [AQ-J-21]). Results: A total of 151 students (response rate: 74.7%) participated in the survey. Of these, 41 (27.2%) reported a total score of >= 20 on the HADS and were categorized as depressed. Depressed students reported significantly lower and higher rates of having a part-time job and a history of enrolment in other faculties, respectively, than non-depressed students. According to the cutoff criteria of the ASRS Screener and AQ-J-21, 31 (20.5%) and 42 (27.8%) students reported ADHD and ASD traits, respectively. Multivariate regression analysis, controlling for age and sex, reported that higher age, ASRS Screener scores, and AQ-J-21 scores were significant predictors of higher HADS total scores. Additionally, higher AQ-J-21 scores significantly predicted lower JSE scores. Conclusion: The degree of ADHD and ASD traits was significantly associated with depression. Moreover, the degree of ASD traits was significantly associated with lower empathy for their patients. It is important to consider that about 20-30% of medical students have these neurodevelopmental traits and to develop intervention strategies for improving depression and empathy.
34737486|a|Families with young children with and without developmental disabilities often create a musically rich home environment. Parent-child music engagement, like singing play songs, is associated with positive outcomes for children, parents, and their relationship. However, little is known about if the home music environment differs across diagnostic groups and if parent-child music engagement relates to parent-child affective attachment across families of diagnostically diverse children. Using an online questionnaire, the current study examined the home music environment of 340 families with young children with typical and atypical development. A variety of musical activities were common in all diagnostic groups. Diagnostic groups differed in active musical engagement, potentially relating to the differing phenotypes of various developmental disabilities. Parent-child music engagement was associated with parent-child affective attachment, even when controlling for relevant variables. Promoting musical engagement at home and through parent-child therapy may be an accessible way to support parent-child relationships.
34737294|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is genetically complex with ~100 copy number variants and genes involved. To try to establish more definitive genotype and phenotype correlations in ASD, we searched genome sequence data, and the literature, for recurrent predicted damaging sequence-level variants affecting single genes. We identified 18 individuals from 16 unrelated families carrying a heterozygous guanine duplication (c.3679dup; p.Ala1227Glyfs*69) occurring within a string of 8 guanines (genomic location [hg38]g.50,721,512dup) affecting SHANK3, a prototypical ASD gene (0.08% of ASD-affected individuals carried the predicted p.Ala1227Glyfs*69 frameshift variant). Most probands carried de novo mutations, but five individuals in three families inherited it through somatic mosaicism. We scrutinized the phenotype of p.Ala1227Glyfs*69 carriers, and while everyone (17/17) formally tested for ASD carried a diagnosis, there was the variable expression of core ASD features both within and between families. Defining such recurrent mutational mechanisms underlying an ASD outcome is important for genetic counseling and early intervention.
34737153|a|Intellectual disability (ID) often co-occurs with other neurologic phenotypes making molecular diagnosis more challenging particularly in consanguineous populations with the co-segregation of more than one ID-related gene in some cases. In this study, we investigated the phenotype of three patients from a large Tunisian family with significant ID phenotypic variability and microcephaly and performed a clinical exome sequencing in two cases. We identified, within the first branch, a homozygous variant in the TRAPPC9 gene (p.Arg472Ter) in two cases presenting severe ID, absent speech, congenital/secondary microcephaly in addition to autistic features, supporting the implication of TRAPPC9 in the "secondary" autism spectrum disorders and congenital microcephaly. In the second branch, we identified a homozygous variant (p.Lys189ArgfsTer15) in the CDK5RAP2 gene associated with an heterozygous TRAPPC9 variant (p.Arg472Ter) in one case harbouring primary hereditary microcephaly (MCPH) associated with an inter-hypothalamic adhesion, mixed hearing loss, selective thinning in the retinal nerve fiber layer and parafoveal ganglion cell complex, and short stature. Our findings expand the spectrum of the recently reported neurosensorial abnormalities and revealed the variable phenotype expressivity of CDK5RAP2 defect. Our study highlights the complexity of the genetic background of microcephaly/ID and the efficiency of the exome sequencing to provide an accurate diagnosis and to improve the management and follow-up of such patients.
34737139|a|Accurate diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) followed by effective rehabilitation is essential for the management of this disorder. Artificial intelligence (AI) techniques can aid physicians to apply automatic diagnosis and rehabilitation procedures. AI techniques comprise traditional machine learning (ML) approaches and deep learning (DL) techniques. Conventional ML methods employ various feature extraction and classification techniques, but in DL, the process of feature extraction and classification is accomplished intelligently and integrally. DL methods for diagnosis of ASD have been focused on neuroimaging-based approaches. Neuroimaging techniques are non-invasive disease markers potentially useful for ASD diagnosis. Structural and functional neuroimaging techniques provide physicians substantial information about the structure (anatomy and structural connectivity) and function (activity and functional connectivity) of the brain. Due to the intricate structure and function of the brain, proposing optimum procedures for ASD diagnosis with neuroimaging data without exploiting powerful AI techniques like DL may be challenging. In this paper, studies conducted with the aid of DL networks to distinguish ASD are investigated. Rehabilitation tools provided for supporting ASD patients utilizing DL networks are also assessed. Finally, we will present important challenges in the automated detection and rehabilitation of ASD and propose some future works.
34737127|a|Coarse information of a visual stimulus is conveyed by Low Spatial Frequencies (LSF) and is thought to be rapidly extracted to generate predictions. This may guide fast recognition with the subsequent integration of fine information, conveyed by High Spatial Frequencies (HSF). In autism, emotional face recognition is challenging, and might be related to alterations in LSF predictive processes. We analyzed the data of 27 autistic and 34 non autistic (NA) adults on an emotional Stroop task (i.e., emotional face with congruent or incongruent emotional word) with spatially filtered primes (HSF vs.LSF). We hypothesized that LSF primes would generate predictions leading to faster categorization of the target face compared to HSF primes, in the NA group but not in autism. Surprisingly, HSF primes led to faster categorization than LSF primes in both groups. Moreover, the advantage of HSF vs.LSF primes was stronger for angry than happy faces in NA, but was stronger for happy than angry faces in autistic participants. Drift diffusion modelling confirmed HSF advantage and showed a longer non-decision time (e.g., encoding) in autism. Despite LSF predictive impairments in autism was not corroborated, our analyses suggest low level processing specificities in autism.
34736556|a|
34736105|a|BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a lifelong disorder, beginning in early childhood, which often accompanies with several healthcare challenges. There is a need for consistent and continued healthcare services throughout the life of an individual with ASD. The majority of previous studies have examined healthcare services in children with ASD and there is limited evidence about healthcare needs of adults with ASD. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this project was to capture the experiences of stakeholders including adults with ASD in receiving healthcare services. METHOD: We interviewed 22 stakeholders, including adults with ASD (n = 13), parents of adults with ASD (n = 5), and service providers (n = 4). Open-ended questions were used to explore their experiences with the healthcare system. We analysed the data thematically to develop the overarching themes. RESULTS: Three themes emerged from interviews including a) availability and accessibility of healthcare services, b) provision of quality healthcare and service delivery, and c) striving for better health outcomes. CONCLUSION: This study found that many adults with ASD can experience a continued lack of access to services and the care they receive is often of limited quality. The unmet healthcare needs lead stakeholders to feel stress, frustration, exhaustion, and possible burnout. The detrimental cost of limited services not only impacts adults with ASD but also their caregivers.
34736084|a|In this study, using vertical ground reaction force (VGRF) data and focusing on the stance phase of the gait cycle, the effect of Parkinson's disease (PD) on gait was investigated. The used dataset consisted of 93 PD and 72 healthy individuals. Multiple comparisons correction ANOVA test and student t-test were used for statistical analyses. Results showed that a longer stance duration with a larger VGRF peak value (p < 0.05) was observed for PD patients during the stance phase. In addition, the VGRF peak value was delayed and blunted in PD cases compared with healthy individuals. These results indicated more time and effort for PD patients for posture stabilization during the stance phase. The time delay for different locations of the foot sole to contact the ground during the stance phase indicated that PD patients might use a different strategy for maintaining their body stability compared with healthy individuals. Although the VGRF time-domain pattern during the stance phase in PD was similar to healthy conditions, its local characteristics like duration and peak value differed significantly. The classification analysis based on the VGRF time-domain extracted features during the stance phase obtained PD recognition with accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of 90.82%, 88.63% and 82.56%, respectively.
34736008|a|INTRODUCTION: The auditory brainstem response (ABR) hearing test can be challenging in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) due to the inherent behavioral challenges associated with this condition. To attempt to increase our success in sedating ASD patients, we added the use of intranasal Dexmedetomidine (Dexmed) to be used alone or with oral Chloral Hydrate (CH) in an ambulatory care setting, with monitoring by a specialist nurse. OBJECTIVES: To determine the success and safety of a protocol for ABR testing performed under sedation with intranasal Dexmed and oral chloral hydrate in ASD patients. To compare the success rate, the occurrence of adverse events and time needed to initiate ABR between Dexmed-CH protocol and previous CH-alone protocol in ASD patients. METHODS: Retrospective review. ASD patients in Dexmed-CH sedation protocol were age- and sex-matched to ASD patients who underwent CH-alone sedation protocol, for comparison. RESULTS: 74 ABR records in ASD children were included, 37 patients using Dex-CH protocol and 37 patients using CH-alone protocol. In the Dexmed-CH protocol group, Dexmed was used in 2 different ways: alone as a first choice in patients who refused to swallow CH (9/37), or combined with CH as a rescue (28/37). Under this sedation protocol, 89% of the attempted ABRs were completed successfully with no major adverse effects. In comparison, in ASD patients sedated using the protocol of CH-alone, the success rate significantly lower (69% vs. 89%). The time needed to initiate the test was not significantly different. CONCLUSION: The use of intranasal Dexmed by itself or in combination with CH was a safe and reliable method of performing sedated ABR in ASD patients. Modifying our previous oral CH protocol to include intranasal Dexmed, substantially improved our success rate of sedation in ASD patients in an ambulatory setting. This study may be of significant value to centers worldwide exploring alternatives to general anesthesia for ABR testing in ASD patients.
34735587|a|DiGeorge's syndrome is one of the most frequent microdeletion syndromes and is associated with a high risk for neuropsychiatric disorders of intelligence, social communication and executive functioning as well as psychotic disorders. The male patient described here represents one of the rare descriptions of Tourette's syndrome on the basis of a 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome. The following two case studies demonstrate the variety of related clinical presentations. A characterization of these patients in a clinical and scientific context by the means of Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) enables a transdiagnostic description of overlapping as well as specific neuropsychiatric functional impairments. Possibly, this dimensional characterization might also facilitate a more exact differentiation of pleiotropic associations between genotype and phenotype.
34735430|a|Recent studies have demonstrated that multiple early-onset diseases have shared risk genes, based on findings from de novo mutations (DNMs). Therefore, we may leverage information from one trait to improve statistical power to identify genes for another trait. However, there are few methods that can jointly analyze DNMs from multiple traits. In this study, we develop a framework called M-DATA (Multi-trait framework for De novo mutation Association Test with Annotations) to increase the statistical power of association analysis by integrating data from multiple correlated traits and their functional annotations. Using the number of DNMs from multiple diseases, we develop a method based on an Expectation-Maximization algorithm to both infer the degree of association between two diseases as well as to estimate the gene association probability for each disease. We apply our method to a case study of jointly analyzing data from congenital heart disease (CHD) and autism. Our method was able to identify 23 genes for CHD from joint analysis, including 12 novel genes, which is substantially more than single-trait analysis, leading to novel insights into CHD disease etiology.
34735289|a|Purpose This study was conducted to evaluate the effects of a multicomponent peer-mediated intervention (PMI) on teaching adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) how to show interest in peer conversation partners by asking partner-focused questions about the person, their interests, or their experiences and by making partner-focused comments that positively affirm peer statements or express concern. Method A multiple-baseline design across three verbally fluent high school students with ASD was used to assess the effects of the PMI, which involved training peers (n = 10) to support conversation and the students' use of target skills, and training the students to use partner-focused skills with the aid of a self-reflection cue sheet during conversation with trained peers in a high school cafeteria. Ten-minute samples of student-peer conversations were transcribed and analyzed. Generalization with untrained peers was assessed. Results The PMI was highly effective in increasing all students' use of partner-focused skills. Gains were maintained by two students in a return-to-baseline condition. Generalization was evident for all students with varied results. Peers and students with ASD perceived the intervention to be beneficial. Conclusions This study adds to the limited research showing that PMI can be used in high school settings to improve target conversational skills and provides preliminary evidence that PMI can successfully address an underresearched pragmatic language difficulty (i.e., introducing and maintaining topics of conversation of relevance and interest to conversation partners) common among adolescents with ASD. These findings invite replication to extend generality and assess the impact of the intervention on peer relationships. Supplemental Material https://doi.org/10.23641/asha.16915663.
34734646|a|Increases in behavior due to context changes are common and are known as instances of renewal. Clinically relevant examples from the literature highlighting renewal often include socially mediated problem behaviors. This report retrospectively analyzed data during context changes for individuals who engaged in problem behavior maintained by automatic reinforcement, to evaluate the prevalence of relapse. Problem behavior reemerged during changes both in the person implementing treatment (e.g., introducing a caregiver; 36%) and in the setting (e.g., introducing treatment in the home; 26%). Most prevalence studies report greatest relapse immediately following context changes but the highest level of relapse was observed after 5 sessions following person changes and no systematic pattern with setting changes. These patterns of relapse likely reflect differences in the function of settings and people relative to automatically reinforced behavior in the present study. Implications of relapse for treatments of problem behavior maintained by automatic reinforcement are discussed.
34734542|a|In German Socialpediatric Centres (Sozialpadiatrische Zentren, SPZ) children and adolescents with mental and physical disorders and disabilities are diagnosed and receive outpatient treatment. This cross-sectional study explores to what extent standardized symptom questionnaires and intelligence tests are applied in German Socialpediatric Centres. In Germany there exist 152 SPZ. One third participated in this questionnaire study (N = 50). Symptom questionnaires are applied by all participating SPZ (100 %), intelligence tests are used by 98 %. Among the most frequent used tests are intelligence tests ("Wechsler Intelligence Scale For Children (WISC)"; "Snijders-Oomen Nonverbale Intelligenztest" (SON-R5,5-17)) and tests assessing mental health symptoms ("Diagnostik-System fur psychische Storungen (DISYPS-2)"; "Child Behavior Checklist-Elternfragebogen" (CBCL 4/18)). Specific mental disorders are assessed with a variety of different questionnaires. In our questionnaire 14 standardized symptom and intelligence tests were listed. The participating SPZ listed 110 additional symptom questionnaires that are used as well. Standardized symptom diagnostic at SPZ seems to focus on autism spectrum disorders, anxiety disorders, and depression. Implications for research and clinical practice are derived.
34734376|a|Vitamin and fatty acid deficiency in children diagnosed with autism has been linked to the etiology and course of the disease but the results have been inconsistent. In our work, we present a narrative review, which includes 20 observational studies that provide data on the blood levels of vitamin D, folate, or fatty acids of children diagnosed with ASD (Autism Spectrum Disorder-AG group), and of a control group (children without this disorder-CG group). The main characteristics and results are presented in a summary table. Of the 20 above-mentioned studies, a meta-analysis of vitamin D and folate levels was carried out in 14 of them, with a total of 2269 children (AG = 1159, CG = 1110). Vitamin D levels were lower in AG compared to CG: SMD, 95% CI = - 0.83 [- 1.15, - 0.50]. In terms of folate levels, a total of 299 children (AG = 148, CG = 151) were analyzed, finding no significant differences with the control group: SMD, 95% CI = - 0.16 [- 0.63, 0.32]. Only one study that provided data on fatty acids in children with ASD was included in the review although it was not possible to include it in the meta-analysis. We conclude that the nutritional status (vitamin and fatty acid levels) of patients diagnosed with ASD should be taken into account, as correct adjustment of these levels-may produce an improvement in the course of the disease and could also reduce the risk of its development.
34733649|a|BACKGROUND: Empathy has long been considered a multidimensional construct, encompassing cognitive, affective and behavioral domains. Deficits in empathic competences in early childhood contribute to psychopathology, and have been variably implicated in several clinical conditions, such as autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and conduct disorders. AIM: To identify and describe empirically validated questionnaires assessing empathy in children and adolescents and to provide a summary of related theoretical perspectives on empathy definitional issues. METHODS: A systematic review of the literature was conducted. Three bibliographic databases were searched. A total of 47 studies were selected for final analysis and 16 distinct measures were identified and described. RESULTS: Questionable to excellent levels of internal consistency were observed, while few studies assessed test-retest reliability. Although construct definitions only partially overlapped, affective and cognitive domains of empathy were the commonest internal factors that were often separately evaluated. New facets of the construct (i.e., somatic empathy and sympathy) and specific clinical populations (i.e., ASD) could be specifically addressed through more recent instruments. CONCLUSION: The combination of different assessment methods is recommended in order to foresee further improvements in this field and try to overcome the problem of limited convergence with more objective measures.
34733188|a|Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common single-gene cause of intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder. Individuals with FXS present with a wide range of severity in multiple phenotypes including cognitive delay, behavioral challenges, sleep issues, epilepsy, and anxiety. These symptoms are also shared by many individuals with other neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Since the discovery of the FXS gene, FMR1, FXS has been the focus of intense preclinical investigation and is placed at the forefront of clinical trials in the field of NDDs. So far, most studies have aimed to translate the rescue of specific phenotypes in animal models, for example, learning, or improving general cognitive or behavioral functioning in individuals with FXS. Trial design, selection of outcome measures, and interpretation of results of recent trials have shown limitations in this type of approach. We propose a new paradigm in which all phenotypes involved in individuals with FXS would be considered and, more importantly, the possible interactions between these phenotypes. This approach would be implemented both at the baseline, meaning when entering a trial or when studying a patient population, and also after the intervention when the study subjects have been exposed to the investigational product. This approach would allow us to further understand potential trade-offs underlying the varying effects of the treatment on different individuals in clinical trials, and to connect the results to individual genetic differences. To better understand the interplay between different phenotypes, we emphasize the need for preclinical studies to investigate various interrelated biological and behavioral outcomes when assessing a specific treatment. In this paper, we present how such a conceptual shift in preclinical design could shed new light on clinical trial results. Future clinical studies should take into account the rich neurodiversity of individuals with FXS specifically and NDDs in general, and incorporate the idea of trade-offs in their designs.
34731905|a|BACKGROUND: Neurological, structural, and behavioral abnormalities are widely reported in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD); yet there are no objective markers to date. We postulated that by using dominant and nondominant ear data, underlying differences in auditory evoked potentials (AEPs) between ASD and control groups can be recognized. PURPOSE: The primary purpose was to identify if significant differences exist in AEPs recorded from dominant and nondominant ear stimulation in (1) children with ASD and their matched controls, (2) adults with ASD and their matched controls, and (3) a combined child and adult ASD group and control group. The secondary purpose was to explore the association between the significant findings of this study with those obtained in our previous study that evaluated the effects of auditory training on AEPs in individuals with ASD. RESEARCH DESIGN: Factorial analysis of variance with interaction was performed. STUDY SAMPLE: Forty subjects with normal hearing between the ages of 9 and 25 years were included. Eleven children and 9 adults with ASD were age- and gender-matched with neurotypical peers. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Auditory brainstem responses (ABRs) and auditory late responses (ALRs) were recorded. Adult and child ASD subjects were compared with non-ASD adult and child control subjects, respectively. The combined child and adult ASD group was compared with the combined child and adult control group. RESULTS: No significant differences in ABR latency or amplitude were observed between ASD and control groups. ALR N1 amplitude in the dominant ear was significantly smaller for the ASD adult group compared with their control group. Combined child and adult data showed significantly smaller amplitude for ALR N1 and longer ALR P2 latency in the dominant ear for the ASD group compared with the control group. In our earlier study, the top predictor of behavioral improvement following auditory training was ALR N1 amplitude in the dominant ear. Correspondingly, the ALR N1 amplitude in the dominant ear yielded group differences in the current study. CONCLUSIONS: ALR peak N1 amplitude is proposed as the most feasible AEP marker in the evaluation of ASD.
34731859|a|BACKGROUND: Total serum bilirubin (TSB) is used in managing neonates with jaundice, but clear evidence on its association with major outcomes is lacking. OBJECTIVES: We evaluated the association between TSB and kernicterus spectrum disorder (KSD). METHODS: We searched PubMed, EMBASE, and CENTRAL till July 2021. Two authors independently selected relevant cohort studies, extracted data (CHARMS checklist), assessed risk of bias (RoB) (QUIPS tool), and rated certainty-of-evidence (Grades of Recommendation, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation). We pooled adjusted odds ratio (aOR) (random-effect) via generic inverse variance methods. RESULTS: From 2,826 records retrieved, we included 37 studies (n = 648,979). Fifteen studies had low, 16 moderate, and 6 high RoB, with majority having concerns on confounder adjustment and statistical analysis. Twenty-two studies contributed meta-analysis data, and 15 were summarized narratively. TSB appears associated with KSD in infants with certain risk factors (aOR 1.10, 95% CI: 1.07-1.13; 5 studies [n = 4,484]). However, TSB (aOR 1.10, 95% CI: 0.98-1.23; 1 study [n = 34,533]) or hyperbilirubinemia (aOR 1.00, 95% CI: 0.51-1.95; 2 studies [n = 56,578]) have no clear association with kernicterus or neurological diagnosis in overall neonatal population (moderate-certainty-evidence). One study shows that infants with hyperbilirubinemia appear likelier to develop attention-deficit disorder (aOR 1.90, 95% CI: 1.10-3.28) and autistic spectrum disorder (aOR 1.60, 95% CI: 1.03-2.49, n = 56,019) (low-certainty-evidence). Certain clinical factors appear associated with KSD, although very few studies contributed to the analyses. CONCLUSIONS: Despite the importance of this question, there is insufficient high-quality evidence on the independent prognostic value of TSB for adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes in most neonatal populations. Future studies should incorporate all known risk factors alongside TSB in a multivariable analysis to improve certainty-of-evidence.
34731776|a|Brain functional connectivity (FC) derived from resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) has been widely employed to study neuropsychiatric disorders such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Existing studies usually suffer from (1) significant data heterogeneity caused by different scanners or studied populations in multiple sites, (2) curse of dimensionality caused by millions of voxels in each fMRI scan and a very limited number (tens or hundreds) of training samples, and (3) poor interpretability, which hinders the identification of reproducible disease biomarkers. To this end, we propose a Multi-site Clustering and Nested Feature Extraction (MC-NFE) method for fMRI-based ASD detection. Specifically, we first divide multi-site training data into ASD and healthy control (HC) groups. To model inter-site heterogeneity within each category, we use a similarity-driven multiview linear reconstruction model to learn latent representations and perform subject clustering within each group. We then design a nested singular value decomposition (SVD) method to mitigate inter-site heterogeneity and extract FC features by learning both local cluster-shared features across sites within each category and global category-shared features across ASD and HC groups, followed by a linear support vector machine (SVM) for ASD detection. Experimental results on 609 subjects with rs-fMRI from the ABIDE database with 21 imaging sites suggest that the proposed MC-NFE outperforms several state-of-the-art methods in ASD detection. The most discriminative FCs identified by the MC-NFE are mainly located in default mode network, salience network, and cerebellum region, which could be used as potential biomarkers for fMRI-based ASD analysis.
34731627|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a highly heritable neurodevelopmental disorder, causing defects of social interaction and repetitive behaviors. Here, we identify a de novo heterozygous gene-truncating mutation of the Sentrin-specific peptidase1 (SENP1) gene in people with ASD without neurodevelopmental delay. We find that Senp1+/- mice exhibit core autistic-like symptoms such as social deficits and repetitive behaviors but normal learning and memory ability. Moreover, we find that inhibitory and excitatory synaptic functions are severely affected in the retrosplenial agranular (RSA) cortex of Senp1+/- mice. Lack of Senp1 leads to increased SUMOylation and degradation of fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP), also implicated in syndromic ASD. Importantly, re-introducing SENP1 or FMRP specifically in RSA fully rescues the defects of synaptic function and autistic-like symptoms of Senp1+/- mice. Together, these results demonstrate that disruption of the SENP1-FMRP regulatory axis in the RSA causes autistic symptoms, providing a candidate region for ASD pathophysiology.
34731586|a|Purpose This study aimed to provide detailed descriptive information about the speech of a heterogeneous cohort of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and to explore whether subgroups exist based on this detailed speech data. High rates of delayed and disordered speech in both low-verbal and high-functioning children with ASD have been reported. There is limited information regarding the speech abilities of young children across a range of functional levels. Method Participants were 23 children aged 2;0-6;11 (years;months) with a diagnosis of ASD. Comprehensive speech and language assessments were administered. Independent and relational speech analyses were conducted from single-word naming tasks and spontaneous speech samples. Hierarchical clustering based on language, nonverbal communication, and spontaneous speech descriptive data was completed. Results Independent and relational speech analyses are reported. These variables are used in the cluster analyses, which identified three distinct subgroups: (a) children with high language and high speech ability (n = 10), (b) children with low expressive language and low speech ability but higher receptive language and use of gestures (n = 3), and (c) children with low language and low speech development (n = 10). Conclusions This is the first study to provide detailed descriptive speech data of a heterogeneous cohort of children with ASD and use this information to statistically explore potential subgroups. Clustering suggests a small number of children present with low levels of speech and expressive language in the presence of better receptive language and gestures. This communication profile warrants further exploration. Replicating these findings with a larger cohort of children is needed. Supplemental Material https://doi.org/10.23641/asha.16906978.
34730840|a|Since its initial description, the concept of autism has been firmly rooted within the conventional medical paradigm of child psychiatry. Increasingly, there have been calls from the autistic community and, more recently, nonautistic researchers, to rethink the way in which autism science is framed and conducted. Neurodiversity, where autism is seen as one form of variation within a diversity of minds, has been proposed as a potential alternative paradigm. In this review, we concentrate on three major challenges to the conventional medical paradigm - an overfocus on deficits, an emphasis on the individual as opposed to their broader context and a narrowness of perspective - each of which necessarily constrains what we can know about autism and how we are able to know it. We then outline the ways in which fundamental elements of the neurodiversity paradigm can potentially help researchers respond to the medical model's limitations. We conclude by considering the implications of a shift towards the neurodiversity paradigm for autism science.
34729751|a|OBJECTIVE: To report on a family which has two siblings with SCN2A mutation caused by germline mosaicism suffering from autism spectrum disorder/development delay (ASD/DD). METHODS: Clinical data was collected for the proband and his parents. Next generation sequencing (NGS) was carried out on the proband and his parents. Suspected mutations were verified by Sanger sequencing of the proband, his parents and brother. To detect whether there is a low proportion of somatic mosaicism in the parents, a droplet digital PCR was conducted. The result of ddPCR showed that the father was germline mosaicism (0.233%). RESULTS: NGS has identified a de novo splicing mutation of the SCN2A gene, c.605+1G>A, in the proband and his brother. Combined with its clinical phenotype and inheritance pattern, SCN2A was judged to be the pathogenic gene. Above findings strongly suggested parental germline mosaicism. CONCLUSION: ASD/DD in siblings with SCN2A mutations caused by germline mosaicism. Paternal mosaicism should be considered as one of the important inheritance patterns for counseling parents with a child carrying SCN2A mutation. The ddPCR can help to reveal very low proportion of germline mosaicism.
34729481|a|
34728965|a|
34728937|a|Ketogenic dietary therapies (KDTs) have been in use for refractory paediatric epilepsy for a century now. Over time, KDTs themselves have undergone various modifications to improve tolerability and clinical feasibility, including the Modified Atkins diet (MAD), medium chain triglyceride (MCT) diet and the low glycaemic index treatment (LGIT). Animal and observational studies indicate numerous benefits of KDTs in paediatric neurological conditions apart from their evident benefits in childhood intractable epilepsy, including neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism spectrum disorder, rarer neurogenetic conditions such as Rett syndrome, Fragile X syndrome and Kabuki syndrome, neurodegenerative conditions such as Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, and other conditions such as stroke and migraine. A large proportion of the evidence is derived from individual case reports, case series and some small clinical trials, emphasising the vast scope for research in this avenue. The term 'neuroketotherapeutics' has been coined recently to encompass the rapid strides in this field. In the 100th year of its use for paediatric epilepsy, this review covers the role of the KDTs in non-epilepsy neurological conditions among children.
34728568|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) adversely impacts >1% of children in the United States, causing social interaction deficits, repetitive behaviors, and communication disorders. Genetic analysis of ASD has advanced dramatically through genome sequencing, which has identified >500 genes with mutations in ASD. Mutations that alter arginine gating charges in the voltage sensor of the voltage-gated potassium (KV) channel KV7 (KCNQ) are among those frequently associated with ASD. We hypothesized that these gating charge mutations would induce gating pore current (also termed omega-current) by causing an ionic leak through the mutant voltage sensor. Unexpectedly, we found that wild-type KV7 conducts outward gating pore current through its native voltage sensor at positive membrane potentials, owing to a glutamine in the third gating charge position. In bacterial and human KV7 channels, gating charge mutations at the R1 and R2 positions cause inward gating pore current through the resting voltage sensor at negative membrane potentials, whereas mutation at R4 causes outward gating pore current through the activated voltage sensor at positive potentials. Remarkably, expression of the KV7.3/R2C ASD-associated mutation in vivo in midbrain dopamine neurons of mice disrupts action potential generation and repetitive firing. Overall, our results reveal native and mutant gating pore current in KV7 channels and implicate altered control of action potential generation by gating pore current through mutant KV7 channels as a potential pathogenic mechanism in autism.
34728519|a|Naltrexone (NTX), an opioid antagonist primarily metabolized by Aldo-Keto Reductase 1C4 (AKR1C4), treats pediatric conditions involving compulsiveness (e.g., autism spectrum, Prader-Willi, eating disorders, non-suicidal self-injury). Pharmacokinetic variability is apparent in adults, yet no data are available for children. This study aimed to examine the impact of age and genetic variation on naltrexone biotransformation. Human liver cytosol (HLC) samples (n=163) isolated from children and adult organ donors were incubated with therapeutically relevant concentrations of NTX (0.1, 1 microM). NTX biotransformation was determined by UPLC-MS/MS quantification of the primary metabolite, 6-beta-naltrexol (6betaN), and 6betaN formation rates (pmol/mg protein/min) were calculated. HLCs from organ donors, age range 0-79 y (mean 16.0{plus minus}18.2 y), 37% (n=60) female, 20% (n=33) heterozygous and 1.2% (n=2) homozygous for co-occurring AKR1C4 variants (S145C/L311V) showed >200-fold range in 6betaN formation (0.37-76.5 pmol/mg protein/min). Source of donor samples was found to be a substantial contributor to variability. Model estimates for a trimmed data set of source-adjusted pediatric samples (aged 0-18y) suggested that AKR1C4 genetic variation, age and sex explained 36% of the variability in 6betaN formation. Although activity increased steadily from birth and peaked in middle childhood (2-5 years), genetic variation (S145C/L311V) demonstrated a greater effect on activity than did age. NTX biotransformation is highly variable in pediatric and adult livers and can be partly accounted for by individual factors feasible to obtain (e.g., genetic variability, age, sex). These data may inform a precision therapeutics approach (e.g., exposure optimization) to further study NTX responsiveness in children and adults. Significance Statement Biotransformation of the commonly used opioid antagonist, naltrexone, is highly variable and may contribute to reduced therapeutic response. Age, sex and genetic variation in the drug metabolizing enzyme, AKR1C4, are potential factors contributing to this variability. In pediatric samples, genetic variation (S145C/L311V) demonstrates a greater impact on activity than age. Additionally, the source of donor samples was identified as an important contributor and must be accounted for to confidently elucidate the biological variables most impactful to drug biotransformation.
34726717|a|
34726422|a|INTRODUCTION: A comprehensive review to identify key topics and to discern patterns in the perspectives of parents of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) can improve understanding of the knowledge flow among stakeholders, thereby guiding future educational strategies. This systematic review and metasynthesis characterized the experiences of parents who have a child with ASD using qualitative studies in the literature. METHOD: A predefined search strategy across five databases was conducted in accordance with PRISMA guidelines. A metaaggregative approach was used to synthesize extracted data into themes that were condensed into overarching categories. RESULTS: Ten themes and nine groups of key stakeholders were identified across 12 studies. Themes were grouped into four categories: behaviors, socioemotional impacts, structural needs, and gaps in knowledge about ASD. Gaps in knowledge about ASD was a pervasive theme that played a critical role in interactions between stakeholders. Families of children with ASD make life adaptations in a variety of areas, including structuring activities around ASD, physical modifications to homes for safety, intentional social isolation, increased financial expenses, and homeschooling. DISCUSSION: Parents must educate themselves on how to manage all aspects of ASD, and in doing so, often become experts not only in the individual needs of their own child and families, but in ASD more broadly. Family experiences contextualize key stakeholder knowledge for application across multiple systems, including education and health care services, home, and the community. Educational interventions that integrate family, service provider, and community perspectives are needed to address the stakeholder gap in knowledge. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).
34726335|a|Predicting genotype-to-phenotype correlations from genomic variants has been challenging, particularly for genes that have a complex balance of dominant and recessive inheritance for phenotypes. Variants in NMDA receptor components GRIN1, GRIN2A, and GRIN2B cause a myriad of dominant disease phenotypes, with the most common being epilepsy and autism spectrum disorder. Starting from the analysis of a variant of uncertain significance (VUS, GRIN2A G760S), we realized the need for tools to map dominant variants for the components of the NMDA receptor. Some variants within GRIN1, GRIN2A, and GRIN2B exert dominant epilepsy and developmental delay, yet other amino acid variants are conserved and predicted to alter protein function but do not have dominant phenotypes. Common variant annotation tools are not powered to determine pathogenic dominant outcomes. To address this gap, we integrated sequence and structural analyses for GRIN1, GRIN2A, and GRIN2B. Using this approach, we determined that paralog homology mapping and topology can segregate dominant variants, with an elevation of intermolecular contacts between the subunits. Furthermore, demonstrating the general utility of our methodology, we show that 25 VUS within ClinVar also reach a dominant variant annotation, including the GRIN2A G760S variant. Our work suggests paralog homology and protein topology as a powerful strategy within the receptor complex to resolve dominant genetic variants relative to variants that would fit a recessive inheritance, requiring two damaging variants. These strategies should be tested in additional dominant genetic disorders to determine the broader utility.
34725409|a|Community-wide lockdowns in response to COVID-19 influenced many families, but the developmental cascade for children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) may be especially detrimental. Our objective was to evaluate behavioral patterns of risk and resilience for children with ASD across parent-report assessments before (from November 2019 to February 2020), during (March 2020 to May 2020), and after (June 2020 to November 2020) an extended COVID-19 lockdown. In 2020, our study Mobile-based care for children with ASD using remote experience sampling method (mCARE) was inactive data collection before COVID-19 emerged as a health crisis in Bangladesh. Here we deployed "Cohort Studies", where we had in total 300 children with ASD (150 test group and 150 control group) to collect behavioral data. Our data collection continued through an extended COVID-19 lockdown and captured parent reports of 30 different behavioral parameters (e.g., self-injurious behaviors, aggression, sleep problems, daily living skills, and communication) across 150 children with ASD (test group). Based on the children's condition, 4-6 behavioral parameters were assessed through the study. A total of 56,290 behavioral data points was collected (an average of 152.19 per week) from parent cell phones using the mCARE platform. Children and their families were exposed to an extended COVID-19 lockdown. The main outcomes used for this study were generated from parent reports child behaviors within the mCARE platform. Behaviors included of child social skills, communication use, problematic behaviors, sensory sensitivities, daily living, and play. COVID-19 lockdowns for children with autism and their families are not universally negative but supports in the areas of "Problematic Behavior" could serve to mitigate future risk.
34724876|a|OBJECTIVES: Higher prevalence of suicidality has been reported in individuals with ASD. This study aimed to (1) Estimate the prevalence of suicidal ideation (SI) in epidemiologically-ascertained, population-based, samples of children with ASD or Autism Spectrum Screening Questionnaire (ASSQ) Screen Positivity (ASP); (2) Determine whether ASD/ASP is an independent risk factor for SI, controlling for known SI risk factors; and, (3) Develop an explanatory model for SI in children with ASD/ASP. METHODS: Participants came from three epidemiologically-ascertained samples of school-aged Korean children (n = 14,423; 3,702; 4,837). ASSQ >= 14 was the cutoff for ASP. A subsample (n = 86) was confirmed to have ASD. SI was based on parents' endorsement of items on the Behavioral Assessment System for Children-2-Parent Report Scale-Children. Logistic regressions were used to assess associations between SI and ASD/ASP, controlling for demographics, peer victimization, behavior problems, and depression. To develop an explanatory model for SI within ASD/ASP, the associations between SI and child characteristics (comorbid conditions, ASD symptoms, IQ, adaptive function) were tested. RESULTS: SI was higher in children with ASD (14%) and ASP (16.6-27.4%) than ASSQ Screen Negative (ASN) peers (3.4-6.9%). ASD/ASP was strongly predictive of SI (ORs: 2.87-5.67), after controlling for known SI risk factors compared to ASN. Within the ASD and ASP groups, anxiety was the strongest predictor of SI. CONCLUSIONS: SI prevalence was higher in non-clinical samples of children with ASD and ASP, relative to ASN peers. These results underscore the need for routine screening for SI in children with ASD and social difficulties, particularly those with high anxiety. HighlightsPopulation-based, epidemiologically-ascertained, school-aged childrenASD and ASP are independent risk factors for SI in school-aged childrenAnxiety is an independent risk factor for SI in children with ASD or ASP.
34724444|a|ABSTRACT: Gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms often affect children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and GI symptoms have been associated with an abnormal fecal microbiome. There is limited evidence of Candida species being more prevalent in children with ASD. We enrolled 20 children with ASD and GI symptoms (ASD + GI), 10 children with ASD but no GI symptoms (ASD - GI), and 20 from typically developing (TD) children in this pilot study. Fecal mycobiome taxa were analyzed by ITS sequencing. GI symptoms (GI Severity Index [GSI]), behavioral symptoms (Social Responsiveness Scale -2 [SRS-2]), inflammation and fungal immunity (fecal calprotectin and serum dectin-1 [ELISA]) were evaluated. We observed no changes in the abundance of total fungal species (alpha diversity) between groups. Samples with identifiable Candida spp. were present in 4 of 19 (21%) ASD + GI, in 5 of 9 (56%) ASD - GI, and in 4 of 16 (25%) TD children (overall P = 0.18). The presence of Candida spp. did not correlate with behavioral or GI symptoms (P = 0.38, P = 0.5, respectively). Fecal calprotectin was normal in all but one child. Finally, there was no significance in serum dectin-1 levels, suggesting no increased fungal immunity in children with ASD. Our data suggest that fungi are present at normal levels in the stool of children with ASD and are not associated with gut inflammation.
34724165|a|In addition to deficits in pragmatics, children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) have weaknesses in complex syntax and working memory (WM). These two deficits may be closely related. Previous work investigated the effects of WM training in developmental language disorders and showed significant improvement in both WM and syntax. The current study tests the impact of 12 h of WM training across 8 weeks in 30 children with ASD, aged 5 to 11. Results showed direct improvements on untrained WM tasks, as well as transfer effects to syntax and processing speed. Stronger WM led to better syntactic abilities. While they must be replicated, these exciting results provide impetus for further studies of WM interventions.
34724164|a|This study investigated the association of child, caregiver, and caregiving measurements with the quality of life (QoL) in 81 caregivers (mostly parents) of clinically referred children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We used the EuroQol five-dimensional (EQ-5D) questionnaire and the care-related QoL questionnaire (CarerQol) to respectively assess health-related QoL and care-related QoL. Health-related QoL was associated with the caregiver's internalizing problems and adaptive coping, explaining 38% of the variance. Parenting stress and adaptive coping were associated with the care-related QoL and explained 60% of the variance. Child variables were not associated with the caregiver's health- and care-related QoL if caregiver and caregiving variables were taken into account. Findings indicate the importance of the caregiver's mental health, coping, and parenting stress in caring for children with ASD.
34722420|a|Background: The health benefits of physical activity (PA) participation are well-documented. Little was known about the PA levels of students with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and their typically developing (TD) peers in inclusive schools. This study aimed to synthesize available studies examining PA levels of children and adolescents with and without ASD and its associated factors that affected their PA participation during inclusive schools applying the social-relational model of disability (SRMD). Methods: Eight databases were searched including CINAHL Complete, SPORTDiscus with Full Text, PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, Eric, APA PsycINFO, and Scopus from inception through May 2021 to identify related studies. Two researchers independently screened studies, assessed methodological quality, and summarized relevant data. The McMaster Critical Reviewer Form for quantitative studies was used to evaluate the methodological quality of the included articles. Results: A total of seven articles were included in this systematic review. Overall, meta-analysis results indicated that children and adolescents with ASD had a moderately decreased PA levels compared with their TD peers [SMD = -0.585, 95% CI (-0.774, -0.425), p < 0.01]. Individual-, social-, and environmental-level factors that influence PA levels in children and adolescents with ASD were identified from the perspective of SRMD. Conclusion: This review indicates that children and adolescents with ASD have lower PA levels than their TD peers in inclusive schools and multilevel factors affect their PA.
34721951|a|A recent theory posits that prediction deficits may underlie the core symptoms in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, empirical evidence for this hypothesis is minimal. Using a visual extrapolation task, we tested motion prediction abilities in children and adolescents with and without ASD. We examined the factors known to be important for motion prediction: the central-tendency response bias and smooth pursuit eye movements. In ASD, response biases followed an atypical trajectory that was dominated by early responses. This differed from controls who exhibited response biases that reflected a gradual accumulation of knowledge about stimulus statistics. Moreover, while better smooth pursuit eye movements for the moving object were linked to more accurate motion prediction in controls, in ASD, better smooth pursuit was counterintuitively linked to a more pronounced early response bias. Together, these results demonstrate atypical visual prediction abilities in ASD and offer insights into possible mechanisms underlying the observed differences.
34721730|a|In the late 1990s using robotic technology to assist children with Autistic Spectrum Condition (ASD) emerged as a potentially useful area of research. Since then the field of assistive robotics for children with ASD has grown considerably with many academics trialling different robots and approaches. One such robot is the humanoid robot Kaspar that was originally developed in 2005 and has continually been built upon since, taking advantage of technological developments along the way. A key principle in the development of Kaspar since its creation has been to ensure that all of the advances to the platform are driven by the requirements of the users. In this paper we discuss the development of Kaspar's design and explain the rationale behind each change to the platform. Designing and building a humanoid robot to interact with and help children with ASD is a multidisciplinary challenge that requires knowledge of the mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), Child-Robot Interaction (CRI) and knowledge of ASD. The Kaspar robot has benefited from the wealth of knowledge accrued over years of experience in robot-assisted therapy for children with ASD. By showing the journey of how the Kaspar robot has developed we aim to assist others in the field develop such technologies further.
34721712|a|This letter is a response to "Gender Dysphoria and Transgender Identity Is Associated with Physiological and Psychological Masculinization: a Theoretical Integration of Findings, Supported by Systematic Reviews" by Dutton and Madison (2020), which relies on theorisations for which substantial counter-evidence exists, fails to engage with these or other criticisms of the theories upon which it seeks to build, and reaches conclusions that contradict existing evidence. Furthermore, the original theorisations contained in Dutton and Madison (2020), and the conclusions drawn from those theorisations, risk causing serious harm to already-marginalised groups.
34721301|a|Objective: To present a rare clinical case of a patient with Tatton-Brown-Rahman syndrome and the outcome of tall stature management with bilateral epiphysiodesis surgery at the distal femur and proximal ends of tibia and fibula. Study Design: Clinical case report. Results: This is a 20-year-old female with a history of proportional tall stature, developmental psychomotor and language delay with autism spectrum behavior and distinctive facial features. At 12 years and 2 months of age she was in early puberty and 172.5 cm tall (+ 2.8 SDS) and growing approximately 2 SDS above midparental target height of 173 cm (+ 0.9 SDS). A bone age assessment predicted an adult height of 187.1 cm (+3.4 SDS). To prevent extreme tall stature, bilateral epiphysiodesis surgery was performed at the distal femur and proximal ends of tibia and fibula at the age of 12 years and 9 months. After the surgery her height increased by 12.6 cm to 187.4 cm of which approximately 10.9 cm occurred in the spine whereas leg length increased by only 1.7 cm resulting in a modest increase of sitting height index from 50% (-1 SDS) to 53% (+ 0.5 SDS). Genetic evaluation for tall stature and intellectual disability identified a de novo nonsense variant in the DNMT3A gene previously associated with Tatton-Brown-Rahman syndrome. Conclusion: Tatton-Brown-Rahman syndrome should be considered in children with extreme tall stature and intellectual disability. Percutaneous epiphysiodesis surgery to mitigate extreme tall stature may be considered.
34721260|a|Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a group of neurodevelopmental conditions that is four times more commonly diagnosed in males than females. While susceptibility genes located in the sex chromosomes have been identified in ASD, it is unclear whether they are sufficient to explain the male bias or whether gonadal hormones also play a key role. We evaluated the sex chromosomal and hormonal influences on the male bias in a murine model of ASD, in which mice are exposed in utero to a maternal antibody reactive to contactin-associated protein-like 2 (Caspr2), which was originally cloned from a mother of a child with ASD (termed C6 mice henceforth). In this model, only male mice are affected. We used the four-core-genotypes (FCG) model in which the Sry gene is deleted from the Y chromosome (Y-) and inserted into autosome 3 (TgSry). Thus, by combining the C6 and FCG models, we were able to differentiate the contributions of sex chromosomes and gonadal hormones to the development of fetal brain and adult behavioral phenotypes. We show that the presence of the Y chromosome, or lack of two X chromosomes, irrespective of gonadal sex, increased the susceptibility to C6-induced phenotypes including the abnormal growth of the developing fetal cerebral cortex, as well as a behavioral pattern of decreased open-field exploration in adult mice. Our results indicate that sex chromosomes are the main determinant of the male bias in the maternal C6-induced model of ASD. The less dominant hormonal effect may be due to modulation by sex chromosome genes of factors involved in gonadal hormone pathways in the brain.
34721185|a|Feeding involves communication between mothers and infants and requires precise synchrony in a special triadic relationship with the food. It is deeply related to their intersubjectivity. This study compared the development of mother-infant intersubjectivity through interactional synchrony in feeding between 11 Japanese and 10 Scottish mother-infant dyads, observed at 6 and 9 months by video. Japanese mothers were more deliberate in feeding at an earlier age, whereas Scottish mothers were significantly more coercive than Japanese mothers at an earlier age. Japanese mothers brought the spoon to infants with a pause to adjust the timing of insertion to match their infants' readiness, whereas this pause was not observed in Scottish mothers. Isomorphic mouth opening between mothers and infants was observed. This empathic maternal display is an important element of intersubjectivity in infant feeding that differed between Scottish and Japanese mothers. Scottish mothers' mouth opening always followed their infants' mouth opening, but about half of Japanese mothers preceded their infants. Further, the mouths of Scottish infants and mothers opened almost at the same time as spoon insertion. In contrast, Japanese mothers' mouth opening did not co-occur with the insertion but was close to spoon arrival, a subtle but important difference that allows for greater infant autonomy. The time structure of Scottish mother-infant interactions was simpler and more predictable at 9 months than in Japan, where the structure was more variable, likely due to a stronger regulation by Scottish mothers. In conclusion, Scottish mother-infant intersubjectivity is characterized as more maternally reactive and mother-centered, whereas Japanese mother-infant intersubjectivity is characterized as more maternally empathetic and infant-centered. Cultural differences in intersubjectivity during feeding between Japan and Scotland are further discussed in relation to triadic relationships and parenting styles.
34721165|a|Background: Individuals on the autism spectrum are often described as having atypical social interactions. Ideally, interactional synchrony helps any interaction flow smoothly with each individual responding verbally, non-verbally, and/or emotionally within a short timeframe. Differences in interactional synchrony may impact how individuals on the autism spectrum experience social encounters. Method: This mixed methods pilot study examined interactional synchrony in five cases of adolescents and adults on the autism spectrum through secondary analysis of video of the participants in movement-based mirroring tasks during dance/movement therapy. Raters described the movement and interactions of the participants while they were leading and following mirroring and engaged in open-ended free dances with a partner. Videos were also scored on measures of affective engagement, flow of the interaction, and synchrony. Results: One of the most striking findings of this study was the difference between engagement in the instructions of the task and engagement with the partner: participants often followed the instructions for the mirroring tasks with little further social engagement with their partner. When participants did engage in moments of social initiation, attunement to the partner, and interactive behaviors, these did not develop into longer interactions. A paired t-test of the correlation coefficients for each participant showed that scores on synchrony and affective engagement were more strongly positively correlated in the less structured open-ended dance and in video clips of interactive behaviors, than in the videos of simply leading or following mirroring. Synchrony was also significantly more strongly positively correlated with the observed flow of the interaction than with observed affective engagement. With the small sample size, however, most of the correlation coefficients were not significant and should be tested on a larger sample. Discussion: Interpersonal synchrony may not be sufficient to effectively support social engagement when individuals on the autism spectrum simply follow instructions to synchronize their movements. Synchrony-based interventions may therefore need to include more complex open-ended social scenarios as interactional synchrony may then be more correlated with perceived interaction quality. Therapists may also need to partner with participants to model using non-verbal social behaviors to develop interactions within mirroring tasks.
34721108|a|Background: The COVID-19 pandemic lockdowns have adversely impacted children on the autism spectrum and their families, especially in Malaysia where this population is often marginalized. The current quantitative research aimed to investigate the impact of the Malaysian COVID-19 lockdown on the behavior and psychological distress of children formally diagnosed with an autism spectrum condition (ASC) as well as the psychological distress and well-being of their parents, in comparison with a typically developing (TD) control group. Methods: The children's ages ranged between 5 and 17 years. The sample included 72 ASC parent-child dyads and 62 TD parent-child dyads. The primary caregiver completed an online survey including the following: demographic and diagnostic information; ASC symptoms; children's inattention, hyperactivity/impulsivity, perceived stress, depression, and anxiety; parents' perceived stress, depression, anxiety, and well-being based on their experience pre- and mid-lockdown (March 18th to June 9th 2020) in Malaysia. Results: Among the ASC group, no significant pre- and mid-lockdown change was found in ASC symptoms (p > 0.05). There were no significant gender differences (boys/girls) in all the child scales. The 2 [diagnosis (ASC, TD)] x 2 [lockdown (pre-lockdown, mid-lockdown)] mixed-model ANOVAs revealed main effects of lockdown on children's attention, hyperactivity/impulsivity, anxiety, and parents' perceived stress, depression, and psychological well-being (p < 0.005). There was a main effect of diagnosis in all child and parent variables, except parents' perceived stress (p >0.005). However, there was no significant interaction effect between diagnosis and lockdown (p >0.005). All child behavior (inattention and hyperactivity/impulsivity) and child psychological distress (anxiety, depression, and perceived stress) were significantly correlated in both the ASC and TD groups (p < 0.005). On the other hand, only some of the parent variables were significantly correlated with child variables (p < 0.0045) in the ASC group while none of the parent variables were significantly correlated with the child variables (p > 0.005) in the TD group. Conclusion: The results provide preliminary evidence indicating negative effects of the Malaysian lockdown on both children on the autism spectrum and TD children, as well as their parents. These quantitative results will be triangulated with the qualitative interview data to provide a holistic understanding of the impact of the pandemic, informing translational policy and practice recommendations.
34721102|a|Objective: Our objective was to examine developmental trajectories of co-occurring psychopathology symptoms from childhood to young adulthood in individuals with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), and typically developing (TD) individuals. Method: We assessed co-occurring psychopathology symptoms in 61 individuals with ADHD, 26 with ASD, and 40 TD individuals at baseline (T1; Mage = 11.72, 64% boys), 2-year follow up (T2; Mage = 13.77), and 10-year follow up (T3; Mage = 21.35). We analyzed trajectories of internalizing behaviors, externalizing behaviors, and total problems with linear mixed models. Results: From T1 to T3, the ADHD group displayed a small decline in internalizing behaviors (d = -0.49) and large declines in externalizing behaviors (d = -0.78) and total problems (d = -0.71). The ASD group displayed large declines in internalizing behaviors (d = -0.79), externalizing behaviors (d = -0.80), and total problems (d = -0.89). From T1 to T2, the decline in externalizing behaviors and total problems were significantly smaller in the ADHD group compared with the ASD group. The ADHD and the ASD group displayed more co-occurring symptoms compared with the TD group at T3. Conclusion: Individuals with ADHD and ASD, respectively, displayed declines in co-occurring symptoms from childhood to young adulthood. Individuals with ASD displayed an earlier decline compared with individuals with ADHD. Compared with TD individuals, individuals with ADHD and ASD, respectively, continued to display elevated levels of co-occurring symptoms in young adulthood.
34720899|a|Ultrasonic vocalizations (USVs) are used as a phenotypic marker in mouse models of neuropsychiatric disorders. Nevertheless, current methodologies still require time-consuming manual input or sound recordings clean of any background noise. We developed a method to overcome these two restraints to boost knowledge on mouse USVs. The methods are freely available and the USV analysis runs online at https://usv.pasteur.cloud. As little is currently known about usage and structure of ultrasonic vocalizations during social interactions over the long-term and in unconstrained context, we investigated mouse spontaneous communication by coupling the analysis of USVs with automatic labeling of behaviors. We continuously recorded during 3 days undisturbed interactions of same-sex pairs of C57BL/6J sexually naive males and females at 5 weeks and 3 and 7 months of age. In same-sex interactions, we observed robust differences between males and females in the amount of USVs produced, in the acoustic structure and in the contexts of emission. The context-specific acoustic variations emerged with increasing age. The emission of USVs also reflected a high level of excitement during social interactions. We finally highlighted the importance of studying long-term spontaneous communication by investigating female mice lacking Shank3, a synaptic protein associated with autism. While the previous short-time constrained investigations could not detect USV emission abnormalities, our analysis revealed robust differences in the usage and structure of the USVs emitted by mutant mice compared to wild-type female pairs.
34720705|a|This paper proposes a Bayesian hybrid approach based on neural networks and fuzzy systems to construct fuzzy rules to assist experts in detecting features and relations regarding the presence of autism in human beings. The model proposed in this paper works with a database generated through mobile devices that deals with diagnoses of autistic characteristics in human beings who answer a series of questions in a mobile application. The Bayesian model works with the construction of Gaussian fuzzy neurons in the first and logical neurons in the second layer of the model to form a fuzzy inference system connected to an artificial neural network that activates a robust output neuron. The new fuzzy neural network model was compared with traditional state-of-the-art machine learning models based on high-dimensional based on real-world data sets comprising the autism occurrence in children, adults, and adolescents. The results (97.73- Children/94.32-Adolescent/97.28-Adult) demonstrate the efficiency of our new method in determining children, adolescents, and adults with autistic traits (being among the top performers among all ML models tested), can generate knowledge about the dataset through fuzzy rules.
34720549|a|We conducted a cross-sectional study to compare the impact of social distancing and lifestyle changes that occurred during Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) lockdown on children and adolescents with and without Neurodevelopmental Disorders (NDDs). An online questionnaire was administered in order to investigate the effects of NDD condition, socio-demographic status, familiar/home environment and COVID-19 exposure on their lives during a two months period of social isolation. We used logistic regression, focusing on five endpoints (remote learning, lifestyle, stress/anxiety, sociality, scolding) to define the extent of these effects. Most questions were paired up to parents and children, to verify the occurrence of agreement. 8305 questionnaires were analyzed, 1362 of which completed by NDDs and 6943 by controls. Results showed that the presence of a NDD, compared to controls, had a significant impact on: Remote Learning (i.e. subjects with NDDs experienced more difficulties in attending online classes and studying), Sociality (i.e. subjects with NDDs missed their schoolmates less), Scolding (i.e. subjects with NDDs were scolded more often) and Anxiety (i.e. subjects with NDDs were perceived by their parents as more anxious). Substantial agreement between parents and children arose from questions concerning Remote learning, Lifestyle and Scolding. The current study actually points out that having a NDD gives account for a stronger influence on school performance and on behavioral and psychological aspects, during a two months lockdown. Such results may provide useful information to governments and school authorities on how carrying through supportive strategies for youth affected by NDDs. Supplementary Information: The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s12144-021-02321-2.
34720032|a|INTRODUCTION: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder initiating in the first three years of life. Early initiation of management therapies can significantly improve the health and quality of life of ASD subjects. Thus, indicating the need for suitable biomarkers for the early identification of ASD. Various biological domains were investigated in the quest for reliable biomarkers. However, most biomarkers are in the preliminary stage, and clinical validation is yet to be defined. Exosome based research gained momentum in various Central Nervous System disorders for biomarker identification. However, the utility and prospect of exosomes in ASD is still underexplored. AREAS COVERED: In the present review, we summarized the biomarker discovery current status and the future of brain-specific exosomes in understanding pathophysiology and its potential as a biomarker. The studies reviewed herein were identified via systematic search (dated: June 2021) of PubMed using variations related to autism (ASD OR autism OR Autism spectrum disorder) AND exosomes AND/OR biomarkers. EXPERT OPINION: As exosomess are highly relevant in brain disorders like ASD, direct access to brain tissue for molecular assessment is ethically impossible. Thus investigating the brain-derived exosomes would undoubtedly answer many unsolved aspects of the pathogenesis and provide reliable biomarkers.
34719691|a|Neurological and psychiatric disorders, including substance use disorders, share a range of symptoms, which could be the result of shared genetic background. Many genetic loci have been identified for these disorders using genome-wide association studies, but conclusive evidence about cell types wherein these loci are active is lacking. We aimed to uncover implicated brain cell types in neuropsychiatric traits and to assess consistency in results across RNA datasets and methods. We therefore comprehensively employed cell type enrichment methods by integrating single-cell transcriptomic data from mouse brain regions with an unprecedented dataset of 42 human genome-wide association study results of neuropsychiatric, substance use and behavioral/quantitative brain-related traits (n = 12,544,007 individuals). Single-cell transcriptomic datasets from the Karolinska Institute and 10x Genomics were used. Cell type enrichment was determined using Linkage Disequilibrium Score Regression, Multi-marker Analysis of GenoMic Annotation, and Data-driven Expression Prioritized Integration for Complex Traits. We found the largest degree of consistency across methods for implication of pyramidal cells in schizophrenia and cognitive performance. For other phenotypes, such as bipolar disorder, two methods implicated the same cell types, i.e., medium spiny neurons and pyramidal cells. For autism spectrum disorders and anorexia nervosa, no consistency in implicated cell types was observed across methods. We found no evidence for astrocytes being consistently implicated in neuropsychiatric traits. In conclusion, we provide comprehensive evidence for a subset of neuronal cell types being consistently implicated in several, but not all psychiatric disorders, while non-neuronal cell types seem less implicated.
34719285|a|LAY ABSTRACT: This letter to the editors discusses the use of the ASQoL for research with autistic adults. The autism quality of life measure was developed for use alongside two existing measures of quality of life developed by the World Health Organization. It was not developed as a questionnaire to be used in its own. The letter raises some concerns about the use of the autism quality of life measure as a standalone measure in a recent study by Caron et al., published in Autism.
34719144|a|In recent years, there has been a steady increase in the number of children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). According to the Ministry of Health of Russia, the incidence of ASD in children under 2 years of age is 5:10 000, at the age of 4 years - 18:10 000. ASD is a complex multisystem disease that affects metabolic and neurobiological processes. The aim of the research was to analyze the dietary habits of children with autism spectrum disorders. In ASD, physical developmental disorders occur, both in the direction of increasing and decreasing body weight, which is accompanied by pathology of the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) and eating disorders. Diseases of the digestive system are associated with both inflammatory and functional disorders in the GIT, changes in the immune status, autonomic tone of the nervous system and the composition of the GIT microbiota. Eating disorders in children with ASD lead to negative changes in the child's nutritional status and aggravates the course of gastrointestinal diseases. Nutritional status in children with ASD is characterized by an excess of calories in the diet (or a sharp decrease in it), excessive consumption of fat, sugar and salt, deficiency of vitamins, carotenoids, mineral substances (calcium in 45.1%, lithium in 30-35%, potassium in 70% of children with ASD). It has been found that nutritional deficiencies in ASD exacerbate neuropsychiatric symptoms. Lack of vitamins leads to metabolic disorders, delayed physical and mental development, rapid fatigue, endocrine dysfunction, and aggravation of the symptoms of ASD. Conclusion. Nutritional adjustments in children with ASD can lead to an improvement in non-verbal IQ and a decrease in the clinical manifestations of autism. The issue of developing recommendations for the organization of nutrition for children with ASD in educational institutions remains highly relevant.
34718843|a|PURPOSE: To assess the risk of adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes at the age of four after an attempted vaginal delivery according to the fetal presentation in birth. METHODS: This retrospective record linkage study evaluated the risks of cerebral palsy, epilepsy, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and speech, visual, and auditory disabilities among preterm children born after an attempted vaginal breech delivery. The control group comprised children born in a cephalic presentation at the same gestational age. This study included 23 803 singleton deliveries at gestational weeks 24 + 0-36 + 6 between 2004 and 2014. RESULTS: From 1629 women that underwent a trial of vaginal breech delivery, 1122 (66.3%) were converted to emergency cesarean sections. At extremely preterm and very preterm gestations (weeks 24 + 0-31 + 6), no association between a trial of vaginal breech delivery and neurodevelopmental delay occurred. At gestational weeks 32 + 0-36 + 6, the risks of visual disability (aOR 1.67, CI 1.07-2.60) and autism spectrum disorders (aOR 2.28, CI 1.14-4.56) were increased after an attempted vaginal breech delivery as compared to vaginal cephalic delivery. CONCLUSION: A trial of vaginal breech delivery at extremely preterm and very preterm gestations appears not to increase the risk of adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes at the age of four. In moderate to late preterm births, a trial of vaginal breech delivery was associated with an increased risk of visual impairment and autism spectrum disorders compared to children born in cephalic presentation. A trial of vaginal preterm breech delivery requires distinctive consideration and careful patient selection.
34717164|a|OBJECTIVES: Sustaining the wellbeing of caregivers of children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) can be highly demanding. This study explored the impact of Dance Movement Psychotherapy (DMP) intervention on the wellbeing of caregivers in comparison with their standard care routine. STUDY DESIGN: This pilot evaluation study used a quasi-experimental design. METHODS: Thirty-seven caregivers of children with ASD were recruited from two special educational needs settings and were allocated to the DMP intervention or the control group depending on their availability to attend the sessions. The participants in the intervention group received five DMP sessions lasting 90 min each. Adult Wellbeing Scale (AWS) and Parenting Stress Index-Short Form (PSI-SF) were the two outcome measures administered before and after DMP to measure the impact of DMP intervention on caregivers' wellbeing and parental stress. RESULTS: The retention rates were poor, with only 50% of participants in the DMP intervention arm attending at least 70% of the sessions until its end. The Minimal Clinically Important Difference (MCID) was achieved for a small effect size in both outcome measures in the DMP intervention group but not in the control group. Results from the Analyses of Covariance (ANCOVAs) showed a significant difference in post-intervention scores between the DMP intervention and the control group for AWS (F1,33 = 106.474, P < 0.001) but not for PSI-SF. In addition, a significant association was found between pre-intervention scores and the number of sessions attended with the postintervention scores of both AWS and PSI-SF. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this pilot DMP study are promising. However, before running a larger randomised controlled trial, strategies to support caregivers to attend the intervention need to be considered carefully.
34717006|a|AIM: To estimate the accumulated prevalence of neurodevelopmental problems from preschool to school age in children with a history of febrile seizures (FS). METHODS: In a community-based cohort of children with previous FS, 25/73 clinically assessed children met diagnostic criteria for neurodevelopmental disorders or had major indications of such problems at the age of 4-5 years. Parents of 54 of the 73 children accepted to take part in an interview according to the Autism-Tics, ADHD and other Comorbidities (A-TAC) inventory, when the children were 9-10 years. RESULTS: There was a trend for ADHD symptom scores to be higher in the FS group. Non-participants at age 9-10 years had had much higher rates of neurodevelopmental problems at 4-5 years, and the total number of such problems at either 4-5 or age 9-10 was 41% (30/73). CONCLUSION: High rates of neurodevelopmental problems (41%) were found at either age 4-5 or 9-10 years or both in this group of 73 children with FS. Non-participants at 9-10 years had had much higher rates of neurodevelopmental problems at 4-5 years. Further follow-up of this cohort is needed before definite conclusions can be drawn about whether FS should be considered a marker for more complex neurodevelopmental problems.
34716974|a|
34716842|a|Participation in research can provide direct and indirect benefit to individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), their caregivers, families, and society at large. Unfortunately, individuals with high support needs, including those with intellectual disability, cognitive disability or minimal verbal ability, are often systematically excluded from research on ASD. This limits the ability to generalize discoveries to all people with ASD, and results in a disparity in who benefits from research. This piece outlines the importance and extent of the problem, which is part of a broader lack of inclusivity in ASD research. It also provides examples of studies that have directly addressed issues that arise when conducting inclusive research and makes recommendations for researchers to reduce disparities in research participation.
34716841|a|Despite overlaps in clinical symptomatology, autism and ADHD may be associated with opposite autonomic arousal profiles which might partly explain altered cognitive and global functioning. We investigated autonomic arousal in 106 children/adolescents with autism, ADHD, co-occurring autism/ADHD, and neurotypical controls. Heart rate variability was recorded during resting-state, a 'passive' auditory oddball task and an 'active' response conflict task. Autistic children showed hyper-arousal during the active task, while those with ADHD showed hypo-arousal during resting-state and the passive task. Irrespective of diagnosis, children characterised by hyper-arousal showed more severe autistic symptomatology, increased anxiety and reduced global functioning than those displaying hypo-arousal, suggesting the importance of considering individual autonomic arousal profiles for differential diagnosis of autism/ADHD and when developing personalised interventions.
34716740|a|Sensorimotor abnormalities are common in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and predictive of functional outcomes, though their neural underpinnings remain poorly understood. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we examined both brain activation and functional connectivity during visuomotor behavior in 27 individuals with ASD and 30 typically developing (TD) controls (ages 9-35 years). Participants maintained a constant grip force while receiving visual feedback at three different visual gain levels. Relative to controls, ASD participants showed increased force variability, especially at high gain, and reduced entropy. Brain activation was greater in individuals with ASD than controls in supplementary motor area, bilateral superior parietal lobules, and contralateral middle frontal gyrus at high gain. During motor action, functional connectivity was reduced between parietal-premotor and parietal-putamen in individuals with ASD compared to controls. Individuals with ASD also showed greater age-associated increases in functional connectivity between cerebellum and visual, motor, and prefrontal cortical areas relative to controls. These results indicate that visuomotor deficits in ASD are associated with atypical activation and functional connectivity of posterior parietal, premotor, and striatal circuits involved in translating sensory feedback information into precision motor behaviors, and that functional connectivity of cerebellar-cortical sensorimotor and nonsensorimotor networks show delayed maturation.
34716732|a|The underlying pathologies of psychiatric disorders, which cause substantial personal and social losses, remain unknown, and their elucidation is an urgent issue. To clarify the core pathological mechanisms underlying psychiatric disorders, in addition to laboratory-based research that incorporates the latest findings, it is necessary to conduct large-sample-size research and verify reproducibility. For this purpose, it is critical to conduct multicenter collaborative research across various fields, such as psychiatry, neuroscience, molecular biology, genomics, neuroimaging, cognitive science, neurophysiology, psychology and pharmacology. Moreover, collaborative research plays an important role in the development of young researchers. In this respect, the Enhancing Neuroimaging Genetics through Meta-Analysis (ENIGMA) consortium and Cognitive Genetics Collaborative Research Organization (COCORO) have played important roles. In this review, we first overview the importance of multicenter collaborative research and our target psychiatric disorders. Then, we introduce research findings on the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders from neurocognitive, neurophysiological, neuroimaging, genetic, and basic neuroscience perspectives, focusing mainly on the findings obtained by COCORO. It is our hope that multicenter collaborative research will contribute to the elucidation of the pathological basis of psychiatric disorders. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
34716630|a|Interoceptive accuracy (IAc), the precision with which one assesses the signals arising from one's own body, is receiving increasing attention in the literature. IAc has mainly been approached as an individual trait and has been investigated through the cardiac modality using mostly non-ecological methods. Such studies consensually designate the anterior insular cortex as the main brain correlate of IAc. However, there is a lack of brain imaging studies investigating IAc in a broader and more ecological way. Here, we used a novel ecological task in which participants monitored their general bodily reactions to external events and investigated brain regions subtending intraindividual (i.e. trial-by-trial) variations of IAc. At each trial, participants had to rate the intensity of their bodily reactions to an emotional picture. We recorded participants' skin conductance response (SCR) to the picture as an indicator of actual physiological response intensity. We fitted a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) model using, as regressors, the SCR value, the rating and the product of the two (as a proxy of participants' IAc) obtained trial per trial. We observed that activity in the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC) increased when individuals' IAc decreased. This result reveals general mechanism of error processing in intraindividual variations of IAc, which are unspecific to interoception. Our result has a practical impact in the clinical domain. Namely, it supports the predictive coding framework whereby IAc deficits may reflect impairments in processing a mismatch between actual interoceptive signals and predictions.
34716524|a|Drivers with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are at increased risk of experiencing driving difficulties. An important aspect of driving safety and skill involves hazard detection. This functional magnetic resonance imaging study examined the neural responses associated with driving hazard detection in drivers with ASD, ADHD, and typically developing (TD) drivers. Forty participants (12 ASD, 15 ADHD, 13 TD) ages 16-30 years completed a driving simulator task in which they encountered social and nonsocial hazards; reaction time (RT) for responding to hazards was measured. Participants then completed a similar hazard detection task in the MRI scanner so that neural response to hazards could be measured. Activation of regions of interest considered part of the executive function (EF) and theory of mind (ToM) networks were examined and related to driving simulator behavior. Results showed that stronger activation of the EF network during social hazard processing, including the bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal cortex, was associated with faster RT to social hazards among drivers with ADHD, but not among drivers with ASD. This provides the first evidence of a relationship between EF network brain activation and driving skills in ADHD and suggests that alterations in this network may underlie driving behavior. In comparison, the current study did not observe a relationship between ToM network activation and RT to social hazards in any group. This study lays the groundwork for relating neural activation to driving behavior among individuals with NDDs.
34716523|a|This study proposes a revision (R) of the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale for youth with ID (CESD-ID) in English and French. 346 youth (36.02% girls) with mild (51.26%) and moderate (48.78%) ID (11-22 years; M = 15.69), enrolled in secondary schools in Canada (French-speaking; n = 115), and Australia (English-speaking; n = 231), as well as their parents and teachers, participated in this study. Results support the reliability, factor validity, equivalence (sex, ID level, comorbidities, and country), and convergent validity (with youth-, parent-, and teacher-rated measures of depression, anxiety, and loneliness/social isolation) of the CESD-ID-R. The CESD-ID-R allows youth with ID to provide a reliable and valid assessment of their depressive mood and happiness suitable for epidemiological studies.
34715901|a|BACKGROUND: Deletions and duplications of the multigenic 16p11.2 and 22q11.2 copy number variant (CNV) regions are associated with brain-related disorders including schizophrenia, intellectual disability, obesity, bipolar disorder, and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The contribution of individual CNV genes to each of these identified phenotypes is unknown, as well as the contribution of these CNV genes to other potentially subtler health implications for carriers. Hypothesizing that DNA copy number exerts most effects via impacts on RNA expression, we attempted a novel in silico fine-mapping approach in non-CNV carriers using both GWAS and biobank data. METHODS: We first asked whether gene expression level in any individual gene in the CNV region alters risk for a known CNV-associated behavioral phenotype(s). Using transcriptomic imputation, we performed association testing for CNV genes within large genotyped cohorts for schizophrenia, IQ, BMI, bipolar disorder, and ASD. Second, we used a biobank containing electronic health data to compare the medical phenome of CNV carriers to controls within 700,000 individuals in order to investigate the full spectrum of health effects of the CNVs. Third, we used genotypes for over 48,000 individuals within the biobank to perform phenome-wide association studies between imputed expressions of individual 16p11.2 and 22q11.2 genes and over 1500 health traits. RESULTS: Using large genotyped cohorts, we found individual genes within 16p11.2 associated with schizophrenia (TMEM219, INO80E, YPEL3), BMI (TMEM219, SPN, TAOK2, INO80E), and IQ (SPN), using conditional analysis to identify upregulation of INO80E as the driver of schizophrenia, and downregulation of SPN and INO80E as increasing BMI. We identified both novel and previously observed over-represented traits within the electronic health records of 16p11.2 and 22q11.2 CNV carriers. In the phenome-wide association study, we found seventeen significant gene-trait pairs, including psychosis (NPIPB11, SLX1B) and mood disorders (SCARF2), and overall enrichment of mental traits. CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate how integration of genetic and clinical data aids in understanding CNV gene function and implicates pleiotropy and multigenicity in CNV biology.
34715405|a|The chemical synapse is one type of cell-adhesion system that transmits information from a neuron to another neuron in the complex neuronal network in the brain. Synaptic transmission is the rate-limiting step during the information processing in the neuronal network and its plasticity is involved in cognitive functions. Thus, morphological and electrophysiological analyses of synapses are of particular importance in neuroscience research. In the current study, we applied super-resolved three-dimensional stimulated emission depletion (3D-STED) microscopy for the morphological analyses of synapses. This approach allowed us to estimate the precise number of excitatory and inhibitory synapses in the mouse hippocampal tissue. We discovered a region-specific increase in excitatory synapses in a model mouse of autism spectrum disorder, Neuroligin-3 KO, with this method. This type of analysis will open a new field in developmental neuroscience in the future.
34714594|a|OBJECTIVES: This study aimed at determining the changes in dental caries experience in elementary school-age children following 5 years of the Students' Oral Health Promotion Program implementation. METHODS: In the present study, totally 2920 elementary school students participated and were selected by multistage cluster sampling. Based on the WHO Oral Health Survey Methods manual (4th edition), dental caries indices in primary and permanent teeth were assessed by clinical examination in schools. Data on socio-demographic characteristics and dental factors were collected through interviews based on questionnaire. The logistic and linear regression was used for data analysis. RESULTS: The mean (SD) age of the elementary school children was 9.45 (1.71) years, and 1481 (50.7%) were boys. There was a significant difference between genders, age, dental pain experience and student's parent supervision with dmft, DMFT and their caries status. For 1-year increase in age, 1.67 times increase in DMFT and 0.33 decrease in dmft were predicted. Girls had higher odds of DMFT. In contrast, the odds of dmft for girls were significantly lower compared with boys. Students with dental pain experience had significantly higher odds of DMFT and dmft. The Significant Caries Index (SiC) score for permanent dentition in 12-year-old children was 5.47. Sex was significantly correlated with SiC index. The odds of developing Sic was 0.98 times lower in girls than in boys. CONCLUSIONS: Dental caries was identified as a major public health problem among the elementary school students despite the implementation of the national project for oral health promotion.
34714519|a|Many people affected by fragile X syndrome (FXS) and autism spectrum disorders have sensory processing deficits, such as hypersensitivity to auditory, tactile, and visual stimuli. Like FXS in humans, loss of Fmr1 in rodents also cause sensory, behavioral, and cognitive deficits. However, the neural mechanisms underlying sensory impairment, especially vision impairment, remain unclear. It remains elusive whether the visual processing deficits originate from corrupted inputs, impaired perception in the primary sensory cortex, or altered integration in the higher cortex, and there is no effective treatment. In this study, we used a genetic knockout mouse model (Fmr1KO), in vivo imaging, and behavioral measurements to show that the loss of Fmr1 impaired signal processing in the primary visual cortex (V1). Specifically, Fmr1KO mice showed enhanced responses to low-intensity stimuli but normal responses to high-intensity stimuli. This abnormality was accompanied by enhancements in local network connectivity in V1 microcircuits and increased dendritic complexity of V1 neurons. These effects were ameliorated by the acute application of GABAA receptor activators, which enhanced the activity of inhibitory neurons, or by reintroducing Fmr1 gene expression in knockout V1 neurons in both juvenile and young-adult mice. Overall, V1 plays an important role in the visual abnormalities of Fmr1KO mice and it could be possible to rescue the sensory disturbances in developed FXS and autism patients.
34714426|a|To efficiently learn new words, children use constraints such as mutual exclusivity (ME) to narrow the search for potential referents. The current study investigated the use of ME in toddlers with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and neurotypical (NT) peers matched on nonverbal cognition. Thirty-two toddlers with ASD and 26 NT toddlers participated in a looking-while-listening task. Images of novel and familiar objects were presented along with a novel or familiar label. Overall, toddlers with ASD showed less efficient looking toward a novel referent when a novel label was presented compared to NT toddlers, controlling for age and familiar word knowledge. However, toddlers with ASD and higher language ability demonstrated more robust use of ME than those with lower language ability.
34714425|a|The aim of this study was to assess text generation and text transcription of children and youth with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD, n = 67) and Typically Developing (TD) peers (n = 67). Participants (80.6% male, ages 9-14) produced a free-style handwriting task analysed for written content and handwriting legibility and speed. Findings showed children and youth with ASD perform significantly poorer than TD peers for written content and handwriting legibility and speed. For children and youth with ASD, poor handwriting legibility predicted poor written content. For TD peers, fast handwriting predicted good written content. Collapsing both groups, ASD group membership negatively predicted written content, after controlling for handwriting legibility and speed. Practical implementations for the educational context are provided.
34713950|a|CHD2 encodes the chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 2, an ATP-dependent enzyme that acts as a chromatin remodeler. CHD2 pathogenic variants have been associated with various early onset phenotypes including developmental and epileptic encephalopathy, self-limiting or pharmacoresponsive epilepsies and neurodevelopmental disorders without epilepsy. We reviewed 84 previously reported patients carrying 76 different CHD2 pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants and describe 18 unreported patients carrying 12 novel pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants, two recurrent likely pathogenic variants (in two patients each), three previously reported pathogenic variants, one gross deletion. We also describe a novel phenotype of adult-onset pharmacoresistant epilepsy, associated with a novel CHD2 missense likely pathogenic variant, located in an interdomain region. A combined review of previously published and our own observations indicates that although most patients (72.5%) carry truncating CHD2 pathogenic variants, CHD2-related phenotypes encompass a wide spectrum of conditions with developmental delay/intellectual disability (ID), including prominent language impairment, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and autistic spectrum disorder. Epilepsy is present in 92% of patients with a median age at seizure onset of 2 years and 6 months. Generalized epilepsy types are prevalent and account for 75.5% of all epilepsies, with photosensitivity being a common feature and adult-onset nonsyndromic epilepsy a rare presentation. No clear genotype-phenotype correlation has emerged.
34713902|a|AIM: To investigate neurobehavioral maturation for neonates who are later diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). METHOD: In a prospective longitudinal design, neonatal neurobehavior was examined monthly in 1- to 3-month-old infants at elevated and low familial likelihood of ASD (n=60). At 2 years, infants were seen for a clinical best-estimate evaluation, resulting in 18 infants with ASD and 36 typically developing infants. Repeated-measures analysis of variance models were conducted to examine the effects of age, diagnostic group, and their interactions. RESULTS: Neurobehavioral maturation of infants diagnosed with ASD was largely comparable to typically developing infants from 1 to 3 months, with the exception of the development of attention. Object-focused attention was significantly attenuated for infants with ASD beginning at 2 to 3 months and was predictive of social-communication skills 2 years later. INTERPRETATION: This is the first study to prospectively examine neonatal neurobehavior of infants at an elevated familial likelihood of ASD who later received a diagnosis. Despite relatively intact neurological and behavioral maturation in the neonatal period, attention to objects emerged as a key early indicator of ASD. This suggests a complex attentional vulnerability within the first 3 months of life that may be associated with cascading sequelae of social-communication challenges and the emergence of ASD.
34713755|a|Anxiety is a cluster of responses that can involve both operant and respondent behavior, which can be both public and/or private in nature, and occurs when an upcoming aversive stimulus is signaled. Despite the reported high comorbidity of autism and anxiety, there has been very limited research on how to directly assess and treat anxiety, especially with individuals who have limited communication skills. In Study 1, anxiety was assessed in five individuals with autism, ranging in age from 10 to 19 years old. Anxiety was assessed by measuring behavior during (1) a baseline (with no putative anxiety-provoking stimuli present), (2) signals for an upcoming aversive event, and (3) exposure to that aversive event. Anxiety presented in several different ways, as both conditioned activation and suppression, and both with and without problem behavior during the aversive event. In Study 2, individualized treatments involving differential reinforcement of alternative responses and stimulus fading were used to successfully reduce anxious responding in all four participants who displayed anxiety. These studies demonstrated a potentially useful means of assessing anxiety in individuals with autism which may not only help to measure anxious behavior and identify anxiety-provoking events, but may also lead to effective treatment.
34713741|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Language impairment is one of the early signs of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) that alerts parents to take their children for early diagnosis and intervention. Little is known about how children's autism traits, IQ, initial language abilities and parental inputs influence their language abilities. In addition, only a few studies have compared the relative influence of these factors. The present study addressed these issues by examining the structural language in parent-child spontaneous interactions. Forty-two Cantonese (Chinese)-speaking autistic children aged four to eight were recruited. Their expressive language skills grew rapidly more than 9 months, but their development trajectories varied. Initial expressive language ability is the only significant predictor of child language outcomes and language growth trajectories. In contrast, nonverbal cognition, autism traits, and parents' input do not affect language outcomes in children with ASD. Therefore, early language intervention is crucial for autistic children at all severity and IQ levels.
34713376|a|Bullying victimization is a prevalent concern for neurodivergent (e.g., autistic, ADHD) youth. Bullying assessment methods vary widely and there is currently no questionnaire specific to neurodivergent youth. The Assessment of Bullying Experiences (ABE) was created to fill this gap. The ABE questionnaire was completed by 335 parents of school-age youth characterized as autistic, having ADHD, or community comparison. Exploratory and Confirmatory Factor Analysis identified a four-factor solution, aligning with verbal, physical, relational, and cyber victimization. Construct validity analyses indicate the ABE converges with an existing bullying questionnaire and diverges from disruptive behavior or internalizing symptoms. The ABE questionnaire is a valid measure of bullying that furthers understanding of nuance in peer victimization for neurodivergent youth and informs group-specific intervention.
34713244|a|Neurological disorder is a general term used for diseases affecting the function of the brain and nervous system. Those include a broad range of diseases from developmental disorders (e.g., Autism) over injury related disorders (e.g., stroke and brain tumors) to age related neurodegeneration (e.g., Alzheimer's disease), affecting up to 1 billion people worldwide. For most of those disorders, no curative treatment exists leaving symptomatic treatment as the primary mean of alleviation. Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSC) in combination with animal models have been instrumental to foster our understanding of underlying disease mechanisms in the brain. Of specific interest are patient derived hiPSC which allow for targeted gene editing in the cases of known mutations. Such personalized treatment would include (1) acquisition of primary cells from the patient, (2) reprogramming of those into hiPSC via non-integrative methods, (3) corrective intervention via CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing of mutations, (4) quality control to ensure successful correction and absence of off-target effects, and (5) subsequent transplantation of hiPSC or pre-differentiated precursor cells for cell replacement therapies. This would be the ideal scenario but it is time consuming and expensive. Therefore, it would be of great benefit if transplanted hiPSC could be modulated to become invisible to the recipient's immune system, avoiding graft rejection and allowing for allogenic transplantations. This review will focus on the current status of gene editing to generate non-immunogenic hiPSC and how these cells can be used to treat neurological disorders by using cell replacement therapy. By providing an overview of current limitations and challenges in stem cell replacement therapies and the treatment of neurological disorders, this review outlines how gene editing and non-immunogenic hiPSC can contribute and pave the road for new therapeutic advances. Finally, the combination of using non-immunogenic hiPSC and in vivo animal modeling will highlight the importance of models with translational value for safety efficacy testing; before embarking on human trials.
34713048|a|Neuropsychiatric disorders are highly prevalent conditions with significant individual, societal, and economic impacts. A major challenge in the diagnosis and treatment of these conditions is the lack of sensitive, reliable, objective, quantitative tools to inform diagnosis, and measure symptom severity. Currently available assays rely on self-reports and clinician observations, leading to subjective analysis. As a step toward creating quantitative assays of neuropsychiatric symptoms, we propose an immersive environment to track behaviors relevant to neuropsychiatric symptomatology and to systematically study the effect of environmental contexts on certain behaviors. Moreover, the overarching theme leads to connected tele-psychiatry which can provide effective assessment.
34712263|a|The clinical heterogeneity of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is closely associated with the diversity of genes related to ASD pathogenesis. With their low effect size, it has been hard to define the role of common variants of genes in ASD phenotype. In this study, we reviewed genetic results and clinical scores widely used for ASD diagnosis to investigate the role of genes in ASD phenotype considering their functions in molecular pathways. Genetic data from next-generation sequencing (NGS) were collected from 94 participants with ASD. We analyzed enrichment of cellular processes and gene ontology using the Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID). We compared clinical characteristics according to genetic functional characteristics. We found 266 genes containing nonsense, frame shift, missense, and splice site mutations. Results from DAVID revealed significant enrichment for "ion channel" with an enrichment score of 8.84. Moreover, ASD participants carrying mutations in ion channel-related genes showed higher total IQ (p = 0.013) and lower repetitive, restricted behavior (RRB)-related scores (p = 0.003) and mannerism subscale of social responsiveness scale scores, compared to other participants. Individuals with variants in ion channel genes showed lower RRB scores, suggesting that ion channel genes might be relatively less associated with RRB pathogenesis. These results contribute to understanding of the role of common variants in ASD and could be important in the development of precision medicine of ASD.
34712184|a|The current study investigated cognitive flexibility in preschool children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and those with typical development using the Reverse Categorization (RC) task and the Dimensional Change Card Sort (DCCS) task. We further examined the relationship between non-verbal mental age (NVMA) and the performance on the two tasks. While no significant difference in performance on the RC task between the two groups was found, significantly more children in the typical developing group passed the DCCS task than children in the ASD group. NVMA was found to correlate with performance in both tasks in the typical developing group but not in the ASD group. When the children were matched on NVMA, no differences in task performance between the two groups were found. The current study found the disparity in performance in two groups on the RC and the DCCS tasks, hence illuminating the importance related to the selection of tasks when studying cognitive flexibility in preschool children with ASD. The study also cast some light on the involvement of NVMA in the performance on the RC and DCCS tasks.
34712116|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a range of neurodevelopmental disorders, which brings enormous burdens to the families of patients and society. However, due to the lack of representation of variance for diseases and the absence of biomarkers for diagnosis, the early detection and intervention of ASD are remarkably challenging. In this study, we proposed a self-attention deep learning framework based on the transformer model on structural MR images from the ABIDE consortium to classify ASD patients from normal controls and simultaneously identify the structural biomarkers. In our work, the individual structural covariance networks are used to perform ASD/NC classification via a self-attention deep learning framework, instead of the original structural MR data, to take full advantage of the coordination patterns of morphological features between brain regions. The self-attention deep learning framework based on the transformer model can extract both local and global information from the input data, making it more suitable for the brain network data than the CNN- structural model. Meanwhile, the potential diagnosis structural biomarkers are identified by the self-attention coefficients map. The experimental results showed that our proposed method outperforms most of the current methods for classifying ASD patients with the ABIDE data and achieves a classification accuracy of 72.5% across different sites. Furthermore, the potential diagnosis biomarkers were found mainly located in the prefrontal cortex, temporal cortex, and cerebellum, which may be treated as the early biomarkers for the ASD diagnosis. Our study demonstrated that the self-attention deep learning framework is an effective way to diagnose ASD and establish the potential biomarkers for ASD.
34712111|a|The center stage of neuro-imaging is currently occupied by studies of functional correlations between brain regions. These correlations define the brain functional networks, which are the most frequently used framework to represent and interpret a variety of experimental findings. In the previous study, we first demonstrated that the relatively stronger blood oxygenated level dependent (BOLD) activations contain most of the information relevant to understand functional connectivity, and subsequent work confirmed that a large compression of the original signals can be obtained without significant loss of information. In this study, we revisit the correlation properties of these epochs to define a measure of nonlinear dynamic directed functional connectivity (nldFC) across regions of interest. We show that the proposed metric provides at once, without extensive numerical complications, directed information of the functional correlations, as well as a measure of temporal lags across regions, overall offering a different and complementary perspective in the analysis of brain co-activation patterns. In this study, we provide further details for the computations of these measures and for a proof of concept based on replicating existing results from an Autistic Syndrome database, and discuss the main features and advantages of the proposed strategy for the study of brain functional correlations.
34711075|a| The impact of sex-specific personality traits has often been investigated for visuospatial tasks such as mental rotation, but less is known about the influence of personality traits on visual search. We investigated whether the Big Five personality traits Extroversion (E), Openness (O), Agreeableness (A), Conscientiousness (C), and Neuroticism (N) and the Autism Quotient (AQ) influence visual search in a sample of N = 65 men and women. In three experiments, we varied stimulus complexity and predictability. As expected, latencies were longer when the target was absent. Pop-out search was faster than conjunction search. A large number of distracters slowed down reaction times (RTs). When stimulus complexity was not predictable in Experiment 3, this reduced search accuracy by about half. As could be predicted based on previous research on long RT tails, conjunction search in target absent trials revealed the impact of personality traits. The RT effect in visual search of the accelerating "less social" AQ score was specific to men, while the effects of the "more social" decelerating Big Five Inventory factors agreeableness and conscientiousness were specific to women. Thus, sex-specific personality traits could explain decision-making thresholds, while visual stimulus complexity yielded an impact of the classic personality traits neuroticism and extroversion.
34711026|a|Objective: To explore the language characteristics of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) at different developmental levels. Methods: The clinical data of 103 children with ASD who attended the Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University from January 2018 to December 2020 was analyzed retrospectively. They were divided into typical development and abnormal development (including mild and moderate or severe) groups based on developmental diagnostic scale results, and also devided into 2-3, 4-6, and 7-8 years of age groups based on age. The language characteristics of children with ASD at different developmental levels and different ages were compared by Pearson's chi-square or Fisher's exact probabilty test, t test, analysis of variance, or Kruskal-Wallis H test. The relationship between language ability and core symptoms of ASD was analyzed by Pearson correlation test. Results: Among 103 children with ASD, 86 were males and 17 were females, with an age of (5.5+-1.5) years. A total of 61 children were charactered as typical development and 42 as abnormal (32 mild and 10 moderate or severe). There were no significant differences in developmental scale, overall language, receptive, expressive, syntax, and semantics scores among the three different age groups (all P>0.05). The detection rate of abnormal language ability in the typical development group was significantly lower than that in the abnormal development group (49.2% (30/61) vs. 100.0% (42/42), P<0.01). Receptive, expressive, semantics, and syntax scores of the typical development groups were significantly higher than those of the mildly and moderately or severely abnormal group (89+-13 vs. 76+-11 vs.71+-8, F=18.61, P<0.01; 80+-12 vs. 66+-8 vs. 58+-7, F=29.69, P<0.01; 92+-14 vs.78+-14 vs. 71+-11, F=17.26, P<0.01; 83+-10 vs. 71+-8 vs. 64+-5, F=29.35, P<0.01). Within the abnormal development group, there were no significant correlations between language ability and the core symptoms of ASD (r=-0.02-0.58, all P>0.05). Within the typical development group, there were no significant correlations between language ability and social interaction, repetitive stereotypes, and limited interests (r=0--0.22, all P>0.05). However, overall language, receptive, semantics, and expressive language abilities were negatively correlated with communication (r=-0.28--0.36, all P<0.05), and there was no significant correlation between syntax and communication (r=-0.24, P>0.05) in typical developmental group. Conclusions: The majority of children with ASD manifest language development disorders, mainly in the aspects of expressive and syntax language. Children with ASD with more delayed developmental level have more severe language disorder. About half children with ASD with normal development have language development disorders. The language ability of children with ASD is minimally correlated with ASD core symptoms.
34710953|a|
34709531|a|
34709530|a|The relationship between emotion regulation, social interaction and different types of restricted and repetitive behaviors is poorly understood. In the present study, structural equation modeling based on information about 239 individuals with autism was used to examine whether emotion regulation and social communication were associated with self-injury and stereotyped behaviors. Results showed that poor emotion regulation had a unique association with self-injury while difficulties with social communication was uniquely associated with stereotyped behaviors. Emotion regulation and social communication were strongly associated and self-injury and stereotyped behaviors moderately associated. This implies that these types of behaviors are often expressions of broader negative emotional states in autism. Treatments that help improve coping and social communication strategies may benefit individuals with autism.
34709152|a|Unrecognised psychiatric and medical conditions can lead poorer health outcomes, lower health-related quality of life and increased mortality in people with autism, compared with the general population. A reasonable adjustment required in mainstream services is patient prioritisation by clinicians with knowledge and understanding of autism. Developed as part of the revised autism strategy, the recently developed autism competency framework lists the range of capabilities that psychiatrists who treat people with autism should have. Psychiatrists could lead the workforce transformation required to make the reasonable adjustments to mainstream mental health services needed to improve outcomes for people with autism.
34709027|a|The understanding of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has changed over the past generation, with recognition of a broader spectrum of severity and a wide diversity of clinical manifestations and co-occurring conditions. Estimates of ASD prevalence in the United States have increased from 2 to 4 per 10,000 in the 1960s to 1 in 54 today. Early screening and diagnosis followed by intensive speech and behavioral therapies can make a substantial difference in outcomes for children with ASD.
34709025|a|Between 5% and 12% of children ages 2 to 5 years are diagnosed with a speech or language delay. Fifty percent of these children experience delays that persist into adolescence, and face educational and occupational challenges later in life. The causes of speech and language delay vary. Some children are born with physical or physiologic conditions that impede speech and language development, whereas others have cognitive or developmental conditions, such as autism spectrum disorder. Risk factors include male sex, prematurity, low birth weight, late birth order, larger family size, and maternal intimate partner (ie, domestic) violence. Although there is no required screening or universally recommended screening tool for speech or language delay, reliable milestone indicators and parent and physician questionnaires can help identify children in need of diagnostic evaluation. If further screening is warranted or if parental concern exists beyond the well-child visit, local resources are available for evaluation and intervention. These include agencies and school districts, as well as speech and language pathology subspecialists.
34708871|a|Infant vocalizations are early-emerging communicative markers shown to be atypical in autism spectrum disorder (ASD), but few longitudinal, prospective studies exist. In this study, 23,850 infant vocalizations from infants at low (LR)- and high (HR)-risk for ASD (HR-ASD = 23, female = 3; HR-Neg = 35, female = 13; LR = 32, female = 10; 80% White; collected from 2007 to 2017 near Philadelphia) were analyzed at 6, 12, and 24 months. At 12 months, HR-ASD infants produced fewer vocalizations than HR-Neg infants. From 6 to 24 months, HR-Neg infants demonstrated steeper vocalization growth compared to HR-ASD and LR infants. Finally, among HR infants, vocalizing at 12 months was associated with language, social phenotype, and diagnosis at age 2. Infant vocalizing is an objective behavioral marker that could facilitate earlier detection of ASD.
34708425|a|
34708325|a|The developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs) are the most severe group of epilepsies. They usually begin in infancy or childhood with drug-resistant seizures, epileptiform EEG patterns, developmental slowing or regression, and cognitive impairment. DEEs have a high mortality and profound morbidity; comorbidities are common including autism spectrum disorders. With advances in genetic sequencing, over 400 genes have been implicated in DEEs, with a genetic cause now identified in over 50% patients. Each genetic DEE typically has a broad genotypic-phenotypic spectrum, based on the underlying pathophysiology. There is a pressing need to improve health outcomes by developing novel targeted therapies for specific genetic DEE phenotypes that not only improve seizure control, but also developmental outcomes and comorbidities. Clinical trial readiness relies firstly on a deep understanding of phenotype-genotype correlation and evolution of a condition over time, in order to select appropriate patients for clinical trials. Understanding the natural history of the disorder informs assessment of treatment efficacy in terms of both clinical outcome and biomarker utility. Natural history studies (NHS) provide a high quality, integrated, comprehensive approach to understanding a complex disease and underpin clinical trial design for novel therapies. NHS are pre-planned observational studies designed to track the course of a disease and identify demographic, genetic, environmental, and other variables, including biomarkers, that correlate with the disease's evolution and outcomes. Due to the rarity of individual genetic DEEs, appropriately funded high-quality DEE NHS will be required, with sustainable frameworks and equitable access to affected individuals globally.
34707483|a|
34707297|a|ITSN1 plays an important role in brain development. Recent studies in large cohorts of subjects with neurodevelopmental disorders have identified de novo variants in ITSN1 gene thereby suggesting that this gene is involved in the development of such disorders. The aim of this study is to provide further proof of such a link. We performed trio exome sequencing in a patient presenting autism, intellectual disability, and severe behavioral difficulties. Additional affected patients with a neurodevelopmental disorder harboring a heterozygous variant in ITSN1 (NM_003024.2) were collected through a worldwide collaboration. All patients underwent detailed phenotypic and genetic assessment and data was collected and shared by healthcare givers. We identified ten novel patients from eight families with heterozygous truncating or missense variants in ITSN1 gene. In addition, four previously published patients from large meta-analysis studies were included. In total, 7/14 patients presented a de novo variant in ITSN1. All patients showed neurodevelopmental disorders from autism spectrum disorders (90%), intellectual disability (86%), and epilepsy (30%). We demonstrated that truncating variants are in the first half of ITSN1 whereas missense variants are clustered in C-terminal region. We suggest ITSN1 gene is involved in development of an autism spectrum disorder with variable additional neurodevelopmental deficiency, thus confirming the hypothesis that ITSN1 is important for brain development.
34707133|a|The habenula is a small epithalamic structure with widespread connections to multiple cortical, subcortical and brainstem regions. It has been identified as the central structure modulating the reward value of social interactions, behavioral adaptation, sensory integration and circadian rhythm. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by social communication deficits, restricted interests, repetitive behaviors, and is frequently associated with altered sensory perception and mood and sleep disorders. The habenula is implicated in all these behaviors and results of preclinical studies suggest a possible involvement of the habenula in the pathophysiology of this disorder. Using anatomical magnetic resonance imaging and automated segmentation we show that the habenula is significantly enlarged in ASD subjects compared to controls across the entire age range studied (6-30 years). No differences were observed between sexes. Furthermore, support-vector machine modeling classified ASD with 85% accuracy (model using habenula volume, age and sex) and 64% accuracy in cross validation. The Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS) significantly differed between groups, however, it was not related to individual habenula volume. The present study is the first to provide evidence in human subjects of an involvement of the habenula in the pathophysiology of ASD.
34706642|a|BACKGROUND: Turner syndrome is the result of the partial or complete absence of an X chromosome in phenotypic girls. This can cause an array of medical and developmental difficulties. The intelligence quotient in females with Turner syndrome has previously been described as uneven, but considered within normal range. Although their social, intellectual, and psychiatric profile is described, it is unclear to what extent these females meet the clinical criteria for neurodevelopmental or psychiatric diagnoses. The aim of this study was to examine the prevalence of neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders in females with Turner syndrome. METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was performed with a total of 1392 females with Turner syndrome identified through the Swedish National Patient Register and compared with 1:100 age- and sex-matched controls from the general population. The associations between Turner syndrome and diagnoses of neurodevelopmental and/or psychiatric disorders were calculated using conditional logistic regression and is presented as estimated risk (odds ratio, OR, 95% confidence interval, CI) in females with Turner syndrome compared with matched controls. RESULTS: Females with Turner syndrome had a higher risk of neurodevelopmental or psychiatric disorder (OR 1.37, 95% CI 1.20-1.57), an eightfold increased risk of intellectual disability (OR 8.59, 95% CI 6.58-11.20), and a fourfold increased risk of autism spectrum disorder (OR 4.26, 95% CI 2.94-6.18) compared with the controls. In addition, females with Turner syndrome had twice the risk of a diagnosis of schizophrenia and related disorders (OR 1.98, 95% CI 1.36-2.88), eating disorders (OR 2.03, 95% CI 1.42-2.91), and behavioral and emotional disorders with onset in childhood (OR 2.01, 95% CI 1.35-2.99). CONCLUSIONS: Females with Turner syndrome have an increased risk of receiving a diagnosis of neurodevelopmental or psychiatric disorder. This warrants extensive assessment of intellectual and cognitive functions from early age, and increased psychiatric vigilance should be a part of lifelong healthcare for females with Turner syndrome.
34706416|a|OBJECTIVE: We investigated the diagnostic progression to bipolar disorder (BD) among adolescents and young adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). METHODS: Using the Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database, we enrolled adolescents and young adults aged 10-29 years with ADHD between January 1, 2001, and December 31, 2010, who were followed up until December 31, 2011, to determine progression to BD. Cox regression analysis was used to examine candidate risk and protective factors. RESULTS: At the 11-year follow-up, the progression rate from ADHD to BD was 5.12%. Of the participants who progressed, 62.16% (322/518) progressed within the first 3 years. Risk factors for progression were as follows: older age (hazard ratio [HR], 1.058; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.033-1.084), comorbidity with autistic spectrum disorder (HR, 1.839; 95% CI, 1.415-2.391), disruptive behavior disorder (HR, 1.434; 95% CI, 1.132-1.816), intelligence disability (HR, 1.744; 95% CI, 1.399-2.176), depressive disorder (HR, 1.978; 95% CI, 1.577-2.482), alcohol use disorder (HR, 1.705; 95% CI, 1.057-2.751), cluster A (HR, 2.508; 95% CI, 1.167-5.391) or B (HR, 2.718; 95% CI, 1.974-3.741) personality disorder, and a family history of BD (HR, 2.618; 95% CI, 1.823-3.758) Identified protective factors were male sex (HR, 0.771; 95% CI, 0.630-0.943) and cluster C personality disorder (HR, 0.278; 95% CI, 0.086-0.898). CONCLUSION: The study demonstrated the specific risk and protective factors for BD progression among adolescents and young adults with ADHD. It is important for clinician and mental health care providers to recognize identified factors to focus on early detection and prompt intervention.
34705632|a|Brain functional connectivity network (FCN) based on resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) has been widely used to identify neuropsychiatric disorders such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Most existing FCN-based methods only estimate the correlation between brain regions of in terest (ROIs), without exploring more informative higher-level inter actions among multiple ROIs which could be beneficial to disease diagnosis. To fully explore the discriminative information provided by different brain networks, a cluster-based multi-view high-order FCN (Ho-FCN) framework is proposed in this paper. Specifically, we first group the functional connectivity (FC) time series into different clusters and compute the multi-order central moment series for the FC time series in each cluster. Then we utilize the correlation of central moment series between different clusters to reveal the high-order FC relationships among multiple ROIs. In addition, to address the phase mismatch issue in conventional FCNs, we also adopt the central moments of the correlation time series as the temporal-invariance features to capture the dynamic characteristics of low-order dynamic FCN (Lo-D-FCN). Experimental results on the ABIDE dataset validate that: 1) the proposed multi-view Ho-FCNs is able to explore rich discriminative information for ASD diagnosis; 2) the phase mismatch issue can be well circumvented by using central moments; and 3) the combination of different types of FCNs can significantly improve the diagnostic accuracy of ASD (86.2%).
34705567|a|Purpose It has been reported that tone language-speaking children with autism demonstrate speech-specific lexical tone processing difficulty, although they have intact or even better-than-normal processing of nonspeech/melodic pitch analogues. In this early efficacy study, we evaluated the therapeutic potential of Auditory-Motor Mapping Training (AMMT) in facilitating speech and word output for Mandarin-speaking nonverbal and low-verbal children with autism, in comparison with a matched non-AMMT-based control treatment. Method Fifteen Mandarin-speaking nonverbal and low-verbal children with autism spectrum disorder participated and completed all the AMMT-based treatment sessions by intoning (singing) and tapping the target words delivered via an app, whereas another 15 participants received control treatment. Generalized linear mixed-effects models were created to evaluate speech production accuracy and word production intelligibility across different groups and conditions. Results Results showed that the AMMT-based treatment provided a more effective training approach in accelerating the rate of speech (especially lexical tone) and word learning in the trained items. More importantly, the enhanced training efficacy on lexical tone acquisition remained at 2 weeks after therapy and generalized to untrained tones that were not practiced. Furthermore, the low-verbal participants showed higher improvement compared to the nonverbal participants. Conclusions These data provide the first empirical evidence for adopting the AMMT-based training to facilitate speech and word learning in Mandarin-speaking nonverbal and low-verbal children with autism. This early efficacy study holds promise for improving lexical tone production in Mandarin-speaking children with autism but should be further replicated in larger scale randomized studies. Supplemental Material https://doi.org/10.23641/asha.16834627.
34705035|a|Importance: Urban residence has been highlighted as an environmental risk factor for schizophrenia and, to a lesser extent, several other psychiatric disorders. However, few studies have explored genetic effects on the choice of residence. Objective: To investigate whether individuals with genetic predisposition to a range of psychiatric disorders have an increased likelihood to live in urban areas. Design, Setting, and Participants: A cross-sectional retrospective cohort study including genotypes, address history, and geographic distribution of population density in the UK based on census data from 1931-2011 was conducted. Polygenic risk score (PRS) analyses, genome-wide association studies, genetic correlation, and 2-sample mendelian randomization analyses were applied to 385 793 UK Biobank participants with self-reported or general practitioner registration-based address history. The study was conducted from February 2018 to May 2021, and data analysis was performed from April 2018 to May 2021. Main Outcomes and Measures: Population density of residence at different ages and movement during the life span between urban and rural environments. Results: In this cohort study of 385 793 unrelated UK Biobank participants (207 963 [54%] were women; age, 37-73 years; mean [SD], 56.7 [8] years), PRS analyses showed significant associations with higher population density across adult life (age 25 to >65 years) reaching highest significance at the 45- to 55-year age group for schizophrenia (88 people/km2; 95% CI, 65-98 people/km2), bipolar disorder (44 people/km2; 95% CI, 34-54 people/km2), anorexia nervosa (36 people/km2; 95% CI, 22-50 people/km2), and autism spectrum disorder (35 people/km2; 95% CI, 25-45 people/km2). The schizophrenia PRS was also significantly associated with higher birthplace population density (37 people/km2; 95% CI, 19-55 people/km2; P = 8 x 10-5). Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder PRS was significantly associated with reduced population density in adult life (-31 people/km2; 95% CI, -42 to -20 people/km2 at age 35-45 years). Individuals with higher PRS for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, anorexia nervosa, and autism spectrum disorder and lower PRS for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder preferentially moved from rural environments to cities (difference in PRS with Tukey pairwise comparisons for schizophrenia: 0.05; 95% CI, 0.03 to 0.60; bipolar disorder: 0.10; 95% CI, 0.08 to 0.13; anorexia nervosa: 0.05; 95% CI, 0.03 to 0.07; autism spectrum disorder: 0.04; 95% CI 0.03 to 0.06; and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: -0.09, 95% CI, -0.12 to -0.06). Genetic correlation results were largely consistent with PRS analyses, whereas mendelian randomization provided support for associations between schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and living in high population-density areas. Conclusions and Relevance: These findings suggest that a high genetic risk for a variety of psychiatric disorders may affect an individual's choice of residence. This result supports the hypothesis of genetic selection of an individual's environment, which intersects the traditional gene-environment dichotomy.
34704667|a|
34704615|a|OBJECTIVE: To evaluate body composition, nutritional status through food selectivity and degree of inadequate intake, and mealtime behavior in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) compared to neurotypical children. METHOD: A cross-sectional case-control study was carried out in 144 children (N = 55 with ASD; N = 91 with neurotypical children) between 6 and 18 years of age. Body composition, nutritional intake, food consumption frequency (FFQ), and mealtime behavior were evaluated. RESULTS: Results showed a greater presence of children with a low weight (18.4% ASD vs. 3.20% comparison group) and obesity (16.3% ASD vs. 8.6% comparison group) in the ASD group for body mass index (BMI) categories (p = .003; number needed to take [NNT] = 8.07). The presence of obesity in ASD children compared to the comparison group was even higher when considering the fat component (47.5% ASD vs. 19.4% comparison group, p = .002; NNT = 10.3). ASD children had greater intake inadequacy (50% ASD vs. 22% comparison group, p = .014; NNT = 3.58), high food selectivity by FFQ (60.6% ASD vs. 37.9% comparison group, p < .037; NNT = 4.41), and more eating problems (food rejection, limited variety, disruptive behavior), compared to neurotypical children (p = .001). CONCLUSION: Children with ASD showed an unbalanced body composition toward both underweight and obesity, a greater degree of inadequate intake, high food selectivity as indicated by their consumption frequency, and more disturbed eating behavior than children with neurotypical development. We suggest monitoring nutritional inadequacies and implementing nutritional strategies to expand the variety of foods children with ASD consume.
34704385|a|Structural brain alterations in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are heterogeneous, with limited effect sizes overall. In this study, we aimed to identify subgroups in ASD, based on neuroanatomical profiles; we hypothesized that the effect sizes for case/control differences would be increased in the newly defined subgroups. Analyzing a large data set from the ENIGMA-ASD working group (n = 2661), we applied exploratory factor analysis (EFA) to seven subcortical volumes of individuals with and without ASD to uncover the underlying organization of subcortical structures. Based on earlier findings and data availability, we focused on three age groups: boys (<=14 years), male adolescents (15-22 years), and adult men (> = 22 years). The resulting factor scores were used in a community detection (CD) analysis to cluster participants into subgroups. Three factors were found in each subsample; the factor structure in adult men differed from that in boys and male adolescents. From these factors, CD uncovered four distinct communities in boys and three communities in adolescents and adult men, irrespective of ASD diagnosis. The effect sizes for case/control comparisons were more pronounced than in the combined sample, for some communities. A significant group difference in ADOS scores between communities was observed in boys and male adolescents with ASD. We succeeded in stratifying participants into more homogeneous subgroups based on subcortical brain volumes. This stratification enhanced our ability to observe case/control differences in subcortical brain volumes in ASD, and may help to explain the heterogeneity of previous findings in ASD. LAY SUMMARY: Structural brain alterations in ASD are heterogeneous, with overall limited effect sizes. Here we aimed to identify subgroups in ASD based on neuroimaging measures. We tested whether the effect sizes for case/control differences would be increased in the newly defined subgroups. Based on neuroanatomical profiles, we succeeded in stratifying our participants into more homogeneous subgroups. The effect sizes of case/control differences were more pronounced in some subgroups than those in the whole sample.
34704349|a|Intellectual assessment in preschool autistic children bears many challenges, particularly for those who have lower language and/or cognitive abilities. These challenges often result in underestimation of their potential or exclusion from research studies. Understanding how different instruments and definitions used to identify autistic preschool children with global developmental delay (GDD) affect sample composition is critical to advance research on this understudied clinical population. This study set out to examine the extent to which using different instruments to define GDD affects sample composition and whether different definitions affect resultant cognitive and adaptive profiles. Data from the Mullen Scales of Early Learning and the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales-Second Edition, a parent-report tool, were analyzed in a sample of 64 autistic and 73 neurotypical children (28-69 months). Our results highlight that cognitive assessment alone should not be used in clinical or research practices to infer a comorbid diagnosis of GDD, as it might lead to underestimating autistic children's potential. Instead, using both adaptive and cognitive levels as a stratification method to create subgroups of children with and without GDD might be a promising approach to adequately differentiate them, with less risk of underestimating them.
34704275|a|AIM: To characterize the neurodevelopmental profile and systemic features of HIVEP2-related disorder. METHOD: This study used retrospective medical history and standardized assessment data from Simons Searchlight to describe the clinical characteristics of 12 individuals (eight males, four females; age range 3y 3mo-12y 8mo; mean age [SD] 7y 7mo [2y 11mo]) with pathogenic HIVEP2 variants, focusing on their levels of adaptive functioning, autism symptomology, and emotional and behavioral characteristics. RESULTS: Common features included neonatal complications, hypotonia, developmental delay, intellectual disability, language impairment, gastroesophageal reflux, and strabismus. A minority of individuals had epilepsy, microcephaly, or a movement disorder. Based on the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales, Second Edition, affected individuals showed impairments in adaptive behavior (mean composite standard score [SD] 56.4 [10.2]; n=8). The cohort also had significant impairments in social problems, as measured by the Social Responsiveness Scale, Second Edition (mean total score [SD] 76.4 [11.3]; n=10) and clinically significant emotional and behavioral difficulties, as measured by the Child Behavior Checklist for ages 6-18 (mean total T score [SD] 66.9 [8.2]; n=8). INTERPRETATION: These results show that individuals with HIVEP2-related disorder have impairments in adaptive and social-related behaviors as well as difficulties in emotional and behavioral symptoms.
34703774|a|Background: Caring for children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is demanding, especially where access to services and support are inadequate. The present study aimed to systematically review the challenges associated with the caregivers whose children have autism. Materials and Methods: A systematic review design was utilized. The searches were conducted from February 2019 to January 2020. A qualitative analysis that was based on meta-aggregation approach and thematic analysis was used. Thereafter, data was presented into themes. The quality of all included studies was assessed using the Critical Appraisal Skills Program (CASP). Results: The search generated 909 articles of which only 9 met the inclusion criteria. The main findings were discussed under the following three thematic domains: 1) Stigma, 2) Financial burden, and 3) Caregiving burden. Conclusions: Evidence from the data reviewed showed financial burden faced by the caregivers whose children are diagnosed with ASD. This was manifested through both direct and indirect cost of treatment. Another key finding was that majority of the caregivers faced stigma from the community. This implies the low level of awareness of the ASD within the community. The present study calls for more programs on the present research problem within the community so as to increase awareness. Furthermore, the current advocacy of Universal Health Coverage programs in the country should incorporate ASD children.
34703084|a|Neurodevelopmental classifications and the collective idea of neurodivergence can be seen as a 'moving target'. In our understanding, this means that it responds to the needs of society as well as potentially infinite neurological differences between humans. Therefore, rather than assume that neurodiversity exists according to the existing clinical categories of autism and related conditions (that are often centred around autism as the exemplary kind of neurodivergence), we leave the possibility open that there are other forms of difference that have yet to be defined. In the paper we explore how neurodiversity has been described as a collective property of brains, as we try to negotiate between us what it is to be human and how we can work together to ensure our flourishing and to alleviate suffering. We consider implications of this understanding of neurodiversity for autism research, and propose that we unpick the analogy between neurodiversity and biodiversity.
34703011|a|Human genetic sequencing has implicated epigenetic and synaptic aberrations as the most prominent risk factors for autism. Here we show that autistic patients exhibit the significantly lower histone acetylation and elevated HDAC2 expression in prefrontal cortex (PFC). The diminished histone acetylation is also recaptured in an autism mouse model with the deficiency of the Shank3 gene encoding a synaptic scaffolding protein. Treating young (5-week-old) Shank3-deficient mice with a 4-week ketogenic diet, which can act as an endogenous inhibitor of class I HDACs via the major product beta-hydroxybutyrate, elevates the level of histone acetylation in PFC neurons. Behavioral assays indicate that ketogenic diet treatment leads to the prolonged rescue of social preference deficits in Shank3-deficient mice. The HDAC downstream target genes encoding NMDA receptor subunits, GRIN2A and GRIN2B, are significantly reduced in PFC of autistic humans. Ketogenic diet treatment of Shank3-deficient mice elevates the transcription and histone acetylation of Grin2a and Grin2b, and restores the diminished NMDAR synaptic function in PFC neurons. These results suggest that the ketogenic diet provides a promising therapeutic strategy for social deficits in autism via the restoration of histone acetylation and gene expression in the brain.
34702975|a|Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS) is a rare genetic disorder presenting with developmental delay, epilepsy, and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The segmental deletion of chromosome 22q13.3 affects the copy number of SHANK3, the gene encoding a scaffolding protein at the postsynaptic density. Biological studies indicate that SHANK3 plays crucial roles in the development of synaptic functions in the postnatal brain. Notably, induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells have enabled researchers to develop brain organoids and microglia from patients and to explore the pathophysiology of neurodevelopmental disorders in human cells. Single-cell RNA sequencing of these cells revealed that human-specific genes are uniquely expressed during cortical development. Thus, patient-derived disease models are expected to identify as-yet-unidentified functions of SHANK3 in the development of human brain. These efforts may help establish a new style of translational research in pediatrics, which is expected to provide therapeutic insight for children with PMS and broader categories of disease. IMPACT: Phelan-McDermid syndrome is a prototypic model for molecular studies of autism spectrum disorder. Brain organoids are expected to provide therapeutic insight. Single-cell RNA sequencing of microglia may uncover the functional roles of human-specific genes.
34702791|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) having core characteristics of social interaction problems and repetitive behaviors and interests affects individuals at varying degrees and comorbidities, making it difficult to determine the precise etiology underlying the symptoms. Given its heterogeneity, ASD is difficult to treat and the development of therapeutics is slow due to the scarcity of animal models that are easy to produce and screen with. Based on the theory of excitation/inhibition imbalance in the brain with ASD which involves glutamatergic and/or GABAergic neurotransmission, a pharmacologic agent to modulate these receptors might be a good starting point for modeling. N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) is an amino acid derivative acting as a specific agonist at the NMDA receptor and therefore imitates the action of the neurotransmitter glutamate on that receptor. In contrast to glutamate, NMDA selectively binds to and regulates the NMDA receptor, but not other glutamate receptors such as AMPA and kainite receptors. Given this role, we aimed to determine whether NMDA administration could result in autistic-like behavior in adolescent mice. Both male and female mice were treated with saline or NMDA (50 and 75 mg/kg) and were tested on various behavior experiments. Interestingly, acute NMDA-treated mice showed social deficits and repetitive behavior similar to ASD phenotypes. These results support the excitation/inhibition imbalance theory of ASD and that NMDA injection can be used as a pharmacologic model of ASD-like behaviors.
34702355|a|BACKGROUND: De novo variants in the voltage-gated calcium channel subunit alpha1 E gene (CACNA1E) have been described as causative of epileptic encephalopathy with contractures, macrocephaly and dyskinesias. METHODS: Following the observation of an index patient with developmental delay and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) without seizures who had a de novo deleterious CACNA1E variant, we screened GeneMatcher for other individuals with CACNA1E variants and neurodevelopmental phenotypes without epilepsy. The spectrum of pathogenic CACNA1E variants was compared to the mutational landscape of variants in the gnomAD control population database. RESULTS: We identified seven unrelated individuals with intellectual disability, developmental regression and ASD-like behavioral profile, and notably without epilepsy, who had de novo heterozygous putatively pathogenic variants in CACNA1E. Age of onset of clinical manifestation, presence or absence of regression and degree of severity were variable, and no clear-cut genotype-phenotype association could be recognized. The analysis of disease-associated variants and their comparison to benign variants from the control population allowed for the identification of regions in the CACNA1E protein that seem to be intolerant to substitutions and thus more likely to harbor pathogenic variants. As in a few reported cases with CACNA1E variants and epilepsy, one patient showed a positive clinical behavioral response to topiramate, a specific calcium channel modulator. LIMITATIONS: The significance of our study is limited by the absence of functional experiments of the effect of identified variants, the small sample size and the lack of systematic ASD assessment in all participants. Moreover, topiramate was given to one patient only and for a short period of time. CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that CACNA1E variants may result in neurodevelopmental disorders without epilepsy and expand the mutational and phenotypic spectrum of this gene. CACNA1E deserves to be included in gene panels for non-specific developmental disorders, including ASD, and not limited to patients with seizures, to improve diagnostic recognition and explore the possible efficacy of topiramate.
34702104|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are defined as neurodevelopmental disorders, which are highly variable in nature and do not form a uniform picture, either in terms of symptomatology or depth of the disturbance. Diagnosis of ASD is made for children who show signs of impairment in social interaction, communication and cognitive skills. The exact cause of autism spectrum disorders has not been determined to date. Although there is no cure for ASD, a variety interventions have been proposed. The most commonly used restrictive dietary intervention is the gluten-free casein-free diet (GFCF), which is based on the opioid excess theory. This paper summarizes and discusses research on the core elements of the opioid excess theory in ASD: increased levels of opioid peptides in body fluids in ASD patients, increased intestinal permeability, altered peptidase activity and the effectiveness of GFCF diet in alleviating symptoms of ASD. Furthermore, we discuss the difficulties and their causes in conducting research with ASD patients. The assumptions of the opioid excess theory have neither been definitively confirmed nor disproved. Research in this area should continue, taking into account the highest possible quality standards and the specific needs and abilities of patients with ASD and their families.
20301775|a|CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The 16p11.2 recurrent microdeletion phenotype is characterized by developmental delay, intellectual disability, and/or autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Developmental delays are related to diminished language, cognitive function, and motor impairments. While IQ scores range from mild intellectual disability to normal, those with IQ scores in the average range typically have other developmental issues such as language delay or ASD. Expressive language appears to be more affected than receptive language. Seizures are observed in approximately 20% of individuals with the recurrent microdeletion. Macrocephaly is common, usually becoming apparent by age two years. Chiari malformations/cerebellar ectopia are the most frequently observed structural brain abnormalities. In individuals with the 16p11.2 recurrent microdeletion the frequency of birth defects of all types is slightly increased, with vertebral anomalies appearing to be most frequent. DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The 16p11.2 microdeletion is defined as the recurrent ~593-kb heterozygous deletion at the approximate position of 29.6-30.2 Mb in the reference genome (GRCh37/hg19). The microdeletion is identified by genomic testing that determines copy number of sequences, such as chromosomal microarray (CMA). This deletion cannot be detected by routine analysis of G-banded chromosomes or other conventional cytogenetic banding techniques. While FISH analysis is not appropriate for identification of the deletion in a proband, it may be used to test relatives of a proband who is known to have the deletion. MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment should be targeted to the specific deficits identified. Full developmental assessment, including neuropsychological testing by a clinical psychologist, is strongly suggested to establish neurodevelopmental needs and treatment recommendations. Refer to a neurologist if seizures are suspected. Because of the high risk of obesity beginning in adolescence, encourage healthy eating habits with attention to portion size and an active lifestyle from a young age. Routine management of vertebral anomalies. Surveillance: Routine surveillance, screening, and management based on American Academy of Pediatrics published guidelines on developmental delays and ASD. Maintain a low index of suspicion for possible seizures (which may manifest as, e.g., abnormal movements, staring spells). Obtain brain MRI if manifestations of Chiari I malformation appear. Periodic reevaluation by a medical geneticist to apprise the family of new developments and/or recommendations and facilitate long-term monitoring for emerging medical and/or mental health concerns. GENETIC COUNSELING: 16p11.2 microdeletion is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. The proband often has a de novo deletion; however, the deletion can also be transmitted from a parent to a child. Prenatal diagnosis for at-risk pregnancies requires prior identification of the deletion in an affected family member. Interpretation of results from prenatal testing is challenging given the inherent difficulty in accurately predicting the phenotype.
34700346|a|Duplication of chromosome 15q11.2-q13.1 (dup15q syndrome) results in hypotonia, intellectual disability (ID), and autism symptomatology. Clinical electroencephalography has shown abnormal sleep physiology, but no studies have characterized sleep behaviors. The present study used the Children's Sleep Habits Questionnaire (CSHQ) in 42 people with dup15q syndrome to examine the clinical utility of this questionnaire and quantify behavioral sleep patterns in dup15q syndrome. Individuals with fully completed forms (56%) had higher cognitive abilities than those with partially completed forms. Overall, caregivers indicated a high rate of sleep disturbance, though ratings differed by epilepsy status. Results suggest that clinicians should use caution when using standardized questionnaires and consider epilepsy status when screening for sleep problems in dup15q syndrome.
34700253|a|The accurate diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), a common mental disease in children, has always been an important task in clinical practice. In recent years, the use of graph neural network (GNN) based on functional brain network (FBN) has shown powerful performance for disease diagnosis. The challenge to construct "ideal" FBN from resting-state fMRI data remained. Moreover, it remains unclear whether and to what extent the non-Euclidean structure of different FBNs affect the performance of GNN-based disease classification. In this paper, we proposed a new method named Pearson's correlation-based Spatial Constraints Representation (PSCR) to estimate the FBN structures that were transformed to brain graphs and then fed into a graph attention network (GAT) to diagnose ASD. Extensive experiments on comparing different FBN construction methods and classification frameworks were conducted on the ABIDE I dataset (n = 871). The results demonstrated the superiority of our PSCR method and the influence of different FBNs on the GNN-based classification results. The proposed PSCR and GAT framework achieved promising classification results for ASD (accuracy: 72.40%), which significantly outperformed competing methods. This will help facilitate patient-control separation, and provide a promising solution for future disease diagnosis based on the FBN and GNN framework.
34700248|a|BACKGROUND: Several medical conditions are known to impair sensory, cognitive and motor functions and are associated with road traffic crashes (RTC). For the drivers of today, we lack updated knowledge on how driving-impairing conditions are associated with RTCs, across all driving-impairing conditions in a given population. We aim to determine this among older drivers in Sweden. METHODS: A national, population register-based, matched case-control study comparing acknowledged driving-impairing health conditions among all older drivers (65 years or older) involved in an injurious RTC in the period 2011-2016 (n = 13,701) with those of controls: older drivers not involved in any RTC (n = 26,525) matched to the cases by age, sex and residential area. The medical conditions, extracted from the National Patient Register from 1997 up until date of RTC, were identified based on ICD-10 diagnosis codes and categorized into the 13 groups of medical conditions listed in the Swedish driver's license regulations. Conditional logistic regression was used to estimate crude and adjusted odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals. RESULTS: Unadjusted ORs for RTC were increased for all conditions. After taking the other 12 medical conditions into account, the ORs remained significant in 11 out of the 13. A strong association was found for the group "ADHD and autism spectrum disorders" (OR 2.79, CI 1.47-5.30), although with very low prevalence among cases (0.2%). Moderate associations were found for three conditions with a case prevalence between 1.3% and 8.5%: epilepsy and seizure disorders (OR 1.53, CI 1.25-1.89), substance abuse and dependence (OR 1.45, CI 1.29-1.63), psychological diseases and mental disorders (OR 1.28, CI 1.18-1.39) and for one condition with a case prevalence of 14.7%, diabetes (OR 1.28, CI 1.20-1.36). CONCLUSIONS: In Sweden, in the current generation of older drivers, acknowledged driving-impairing medical conditions at the national and European levels remain a concern. After adjustment for one another, all but 2 of the conditions are associated with RTCs albeit to varying degrees and more pronounced in the age group 65-79 compared to 80 or older. To promote and sustain older people's mobility, addressing this issue will require a blend of interventions where, hopefully, technological and infrastructural innovations may help counteracting individual health-related shortcomings.
34699714|a|Introduction: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of complex lifelong neurodevelopmental disorders, characterized by difficulties in social communication and stereotyped behaviours. Due to the increasing number of children with ASD, it is important to continue developing interventions as well as invent new ones. Human-robot interaction can contribute to better outcomes for these children. There are several robots such as Nao, Kaspar, ZENO, Probo, ZECA, etc. which are used in autism interventions. Many mobile and web applications are in constant growth, too. They target skills such as collaboration, social skills, language skills, social competence, and communication. Aim: To explore the usability of the humanoid robot Kaspar and a complementary app in interventions of children with ASD. Sample: 20 children with ASD, aged between 23 and 76 months old. Method: As an added intervention for this group of children, we used the robot Kaspar and its complementary app. Kaspar is a child-sized humanoid robot that uses bodily expressions, facial expressions, gestures, and pre-recorded speech to interact with a human. Results: This intervention achieved certain positive shifts in eight of the eleven measured developmental domains, such as communication functions and means, turn taking, imitation, language skills, play, attention and daily life skills. The three categories that had inconsiderable improvement are vocalization and speech, cause and effect and coping skills. Conclusion: Based on the measurements before and after the use of Kaspar and its complementary app, there is improvement, primarily in the domains of language, imitation and communication skills and attention.
34699703|a|Potocki-Lupski syndrome (PTLS) is a contiguous gene syndrome caused by duplication of chromosome 17p11.2. PTLS is characterized by hypotonia, failure to thrive, congenital anomalies (particularly of the cardiovascular system), intellectual disability, and behavioural disturbances. The patient was a full-term baby girl, 2,750 grams at birth, delivered via an uncomplicated vaginal delivery with pronounced hypotonia at birth. Nevertheless, there was failure to thrive (weight 7.6 kg; 2.8 SD). Micrognathia, epicanthal skin folds, and megalocornea were noticeable. There was a harsh continuous systolic murmur, and the ultrasound of the heart revealed a persistent arteriosus duct which was surgically closed. At the age of 18 months, the girl could not sit without support, and she could not utter simple words. The girl is often moody, angry, and aggressive. She is hyperactive and unable to establish contacts with family members. A 17p12-p11.2 microduplication was identified via MLPA. Muscle hypotonia, congenital heart malformation, failure to thrive, developmental delay, behavioural disturbances (or autism spectrum disorder), and intellectual disability are early signs of PTLS. The presence of PTLS was proven by an MLPA analysis.
34698906|a|PURPOSE: The aim of this study is to determine the association between mental disorders and strabismus in South Korean children and adolescents. METHODS: Using data from the Korean National Health Claims Database from 2011 to 2017, the prevalence rates of mental illnesses and odds ratio were calculated. Children and adolescents (1-19 years) with strabismus and their randomly selected nonstrabismic age- and sex-matched controls (1:1) were enrolled. The odds ratios were adjusted for preterm birth, cerebral palsy, and mental retardation. Subgroup analysis was performed according to sex and the type of strabismus. RESULTS: A total of 327,076 subjects (male, 158,597; female, 168,479) identified as strabismus patients were enrolled. After adjusting for preterm birth, cerebral palsy, and mental retardation, the corrected odds ratio of overall mental illness was 1.10 (95% CI, 1.08-1.12) for the strabismus group compared to the controls: 1.7 (95% CI, 1.62-1.78) for developmental disorder, 1.36 (95% CI, 1.27-1.45) for pervasive developmental disorder (autism), 1.14 (95% CI, 1.10-1.17) for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 1.15 (95% CI, 1.05-1.27) for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 1.08 (95% CI, 1.05-1.11) for pediatric behavioral and emotional disorders, 0.93 (95% CI, 0.88-0.99) for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and 0.85 (95% CI, 0.82-0.89) for tic disorder. CONCLUSION: South Korean children and adolescents with strabismus had a higher relative risk for various types of mental disorders such as a developmental disorder, autism, ADHD, and OCD than the controls, whereas they had a relatively lower risk of tic disorder.
34698660|a|BACKGROUND: The determination of the rate of social distancing compliance and mask-wearing adherence is essential to address the health aspects of COVID-19. The present study aimed to estimate the adherence to mask-wearing and maintaining the social distancing in public places in Hamadan, western Iran, during the COVID-19 pandemic. STUDY DESIGN: The present study was conducted based on a cross-sectional design. METHODS: The current study included 72 images from 12 areas in Hamadan as clusters in January 2021. The images were extracted from the traffic control center of Hamadan Municipality. The mean of social distancing and percentage of mask-wearing in all clusters were obtained based on cluster sampling. RESULTS: In this research, the majority of people(68%) of people in public places were men and 32% women. The mean+-SD of social distancing in all public places in Hamadan was obtained at 65.27 +-73.37 cm (95% CI: 38.48-92.08). The percentage of men who wore masks correctly was higher than that of women (57% vs. 51%). Moreover, mask-wearing adherence was not recognizable in about 34% of people in the images (28% of men versus 48% of women). Among the people whose images were recognizable, all the women were wearing masks, while about 13% of men were not (P<0.05). CONCLUSION: As evidenced by the obtained results, the mean social distance in Hamadan was much lower than the standard value (1.5-2 meters) even at the time of restrictions. Although more than half of people wore masks in public places, it was much less than that in developed countries. Therefore, people should pay more attention to health advice regarding mask-wearing and maintaining social distance.
34698522|a|OBJECTIVE: A fine-tuned balance of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) activation is essential for organ formation, with disturbances influencing many health outcomes. In utero, glucocorticoids have been linked to brain-related negative outcomes, with unclear underlying mechanisms, especially regarding cell-type-specific effects. An in vitro model of fetal human brain development, induced human pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived cerebral organoids, was used to test whether cerebral organoids are suitable for studying the impact of prenatal glucocorticoid exposure on the developing brain. METHODS: The GR was activated with the synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone, and the effects were mapped using single-cell transcriptomics across development. RESULTS: The GR was expressed in all cell types, with increasing expression levels through development. Not only did its activation elicit translocation to the nucleus and the expected effects on known GR-regulated pathways, but also neurons and progenitor cells showed targeted regulation of differentiation- and maturation-related transcripts. Uniquely in neurons, differentially expressed transcripts were significantly enriched for genes associated with behavior-related phenotypes and disorders. This human neuronal glucocorticoid response profile was validated across organoids from three independent hiPSC lines reprogrammed from different source tissues from both male and female donors. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that excessive glucocorticoid exposure could interfere with neuronal maturation in utero, leading to increased disease susceptibility through neurodevelopmental processes at the interface of genetic susceptibility and environmental exposure. Cerebral organoids are a valuable translational resource for exploring the effects of glucocorticoids on early human brain development.
34698260|a|BACKGROUND: Two of the most challenging behaviors exhibited by individuals on the autism spectrum are self-injurious behavior (SIB) and aggression. The aim of this study was to identify co-occurring symptoms, behaviors, and medical comorbidities that may provide insight into understanding and treating these behaviors. METHOD: A large-scale online survey was used to collect data on symptoms, behaviors, and medically related comorbidities commonly reported in individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Based on responses from 2327 participants, individuals with ASD were divided into four categories: individuals who engaged in SIB only, individuals who engaged in aggression only, individuals who engaged in both behaviors, and individuals who engaged in neither behavior. RESULTS: There were several characteristics and comorbidities associated with those who engaged in SIB only and in aggression only, in addition to those who engaged in both behaviors. CONCLUSION: The findings in this study provide evidence to support at least two underlying causes of these behaviors (insensitivity to pain and reactions to food) as well as implications for treating them. Furthermore, several behaviors often observed during early childhood may be considered early predictors of these challenging behaviors.
34698068|a|Hyperacusis is highly prevalent in the autism spectrum disorder (ASD) population. This auditory hypersensitivity can trigger pragmatically atypical reactions that may impact social and academic domains. Objective: The aim of this report is to describe the relationship between decreased sound tolerance disorders and the ASD population. Topics covered: The main topics discussed include (1) assessment and prevalence of hyperacusis in ASD; (2) etiology of hyperacusis in ASD; (3) treatment of hyperacusis in ASD. Conclusions: Knowledge of the assessment and treatment of decreased sound tolerance disorders within the ASD population is growing and changing.
34697914|a|The Thai Diagnostic Autism Scale (TDAS) was developed for use as a diagnostic tool for the early diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) in Thai children aged 12-48 months old. TDAS consists of 23 items (13 and 17 items in the observational and interview sections, respectively) classified into seven domains (A1-A3 and B1-B4) according to the criteria in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder, fifth edition (DSM-5). Children with a single score in the A1-A3 domains and at least two of the B1-B4 domains were classified with ASD. The item-objective congruence (IOC) index, confirmatory factor analysis, and Kappa coefficient were used to evaluate the content, constructs, and inter-rater validity levels between the evaluators and concurrent validity between TDAS and physicians' diagnoses, respectively. TDAS showed good overall content validity (IOC range 0.71-1.00), suitable construct validity (root-mean-squared errors of approximation of 0.076 and 0.067, comparative fit indexes of 0.902 and 0.858, and Tucker-Lewis indexes of 0.882 and 0.837 for the observation and interview sections, respectively), and excellent diagnostic agreement between TDAS and the evaluators (Kappa = 1.000) as well as between TDAS and the physicians' diagnoses (Kappa = 0.871). The sensitivity and specificity of TDAS were 100% and 82.4%, respectively. In conclusion, TDAS yielded a high level of content validity, concurrent validity, and inter-rater reliability for the early diagnosis of ASD in Thai children. A large-scale study using TDAS is needed to determine an appropriate cut-off point as well as its efficacy. LAY SUMMARY: The Thai Diagnostic Autism Scale was developed for use as a diagnostic tool for the early diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) among Thai children. It contains 23 items in seven domains for the screening via observations and interviews. The psychometric properties of this diagnostic tool provide its reliability and suitability for the early diagnosis of ASD. A large-scale study using it is needed to determine an appropriate cut-off point as well as its efficacy.
34697454|a|
34696666|a|BACKGROUND: Children on the autism spectrum may receive Early Intensive Behavioural Intervention (EIBI) in Sweden to support development by providing learning opportunities. However, research suggests a need to improve the quality of their learning environment. AIM: This pre-registered study (#NCT03634761) aimed to evaluate the Swedish Autism Program Environment Rating Scale (APERS-P-SE) as a means to promote the quality of the pre-school learning environment for children on the autism spectrum, along with outcomes for these children, and their pre-school staff. MATERIAL AND METHODS: In a quasi-experimental study, pre-school staff (n = 35) conducted either EIBI supported by in-service training and on-site coaching based on APERS-P-SE assessment (at k = 9 preschools) or EIBI only (k = 8), during an 8-months period. RESULTS: The quality of the immediate learning environment (primary outcome) increased significantly in the EIBI/APERS-P-SE preschools. However, changes in child and pre-school staff measures were not significant. CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: In-service training and on-site coaching based on APERS-P-SE assessments can increase the quality of the learning environment in Swedish pre-school. Studies of longer duration and larger sample size are required to determine if using the APERS-P-SE can also achieve desired behavioural change for children-, and impact pre-school staff applying EIBI.
34695825|a|
34695561|a|Over the past 70 years, the understanding of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) improved greatly and is characterized as a heterogeneous neuropsychiatric syndrome. ASD is characterized by difficulties in social communication, restricted and repetitive behavior, interests, or activities. And it is often described as a combination of genetic predisposition and environmental factors. There are many treatments and approaches to ASD, including pharmacological therapies with antipsychotics, antidepressants, mood regulators, stimulants, and behavioral ones. However, no treatment is capable of reverting ASD. This review provides an overview of animal models of autism. We summarized genetic and environmental models and then valproic acid treatment as a useful model for ASD. As well as the main therapies and approaches used in the treatment, relating them to the neurochemical pathways altered in ASD, emphasizing the pharmacological potential of peptides and bioinspired compounds found in animal venoms as a possible future treatment for ASD.
34695420|a|For autistic individuals, sensory stimulation can be experienced as overwhelming. Models of predictive coding postulate that cortical mechanisms disamplify predictable information and amplify prediction errors that surpass a defined precision level. In autism, the neuronal processing is putting an inflexibly high precision on prediction errors according to the HIPPEA theory (High, Inflexible Precision of Prediction Errors in Autism). We used an apparent motion paradigm to test this prediction. In apparent motion paradigms, the illusory motion of an object creates a prediction about where and when an internally generated token would be moving along the apparent motion trace. This illusion facilitates the perception of a flashing stimulus (target) appearing in-time with the apparent motion token and is perceived as a predictable event (predictable target). In contrast, a flashing stimulus appearing out-of-time with the apparent motion illusion is an unpredictable target that is less often detected even though it produces a prediction error signal. If a prediction error does not surpass a given precision threshold the stimulation event is discounted and therefore less often detected than predictable tokens. In autism, the precision threshold is lower and the same prediction errors (unpredictable target) triggers a detection similar to that of a predictable flash stimulus. To test this hypothesis, we recruited 11 autistic males and 9 neurotypical matched controls. The participants were tasked to detect flashing stimuli placed on an apparent motion trace either in-time or out-of-time with the apparent motion illusion. Descriptively, 66% (6/9) of neurotypical and 64% (7/11) of autistic participants were better at detecting predictable targets. The prediction established by illusory motion appears to assist autistic and neurotypical individuals equally in the detection of predictable over unpredictable targets. Importantly, 55% (6/11) of autistic participants had faster responses for unpredictable targets, whereas only 22% (2/9) of neurotypicals had faster responses to unpredictable compared to predictable targets. Hence, these tentative results suggest that for autistic participants, unpredictable targets produce an above threshold prediction error, which leads to faster response. This difference in unpredictable target detection can be encapsulated under the HIPPEA theory, suggesting that precision setting could be aberrant in autistic individuals with respect to prediction errors. These tentative results should be considered in light of the small sample. For this reason, we provide the full set of materials necessary to replicate and extend the results.
34694472|a|Adolescents with high autistic traits are at increased risk of depression. Despite the importance of seeking help for early intervention, evidence on help-seeking intentions amongst this population is scarce. Using a population-based cohort in Japan, we examined adolescents' help-seeking intentions and preferences by the level of autistic traits and tested its mediating role on the association between high autistic traits and depressive symptoms. At age 12, we measured parent-rated autistic traits using the short version of the Autism Spectrum Quotient and classified the adolescents into two groups (>= 6 as AQhigh, < 6 as AQlow); help-seeking intentions and preferences were assessed through a depression vignette. At age 14, depressive symptoms were self-rated using the Short Mood and Feelings Questionnaire. Hypothesised associations between autistic traits and help-seeking intentions or depressive symptoms were tested applying multivariable regression modelling, while mediation was tested with structural equation modelling. Of the 2505 adolescent participants, 200 (8%) were classified as AQhigh. In both groups, the main source of help-seeking was their family; however, 40% of the AQhigh group reported having no help-seeking intentions compared to 27% in the AQlow. The AQhigh group was at increased risk of not having help-seeking intentions (OR 1.84, 95% CI 1.35-2.50) and higher depressive symptoms (b coefficient 1.06, 0.33-1.79). Help-seeking intentions mediated 18% of the association mentioned above. Interventions to promote help-seeking intentions among adolescents with high autistic traits could reduce their subsequent depressive symptoms. Ideally, such interventions should be provided prior to adolescence and with the involvement of their parents.
34694238|a|BACKGROUND: The early diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is highly desirable but remains a challenging task, which requires a set of cognitive tests and hours of clinical examinations. In addition, variations of such symptoms exist, which can make the identification of ASD even more difficult. Although diagnosis tests are largely developed by experts, they are still subject to human bias. In this respect, computer-assisted technologies can play a key role in supporting the screening process. OBJECTIVE: This paper follows on the path of using eye tracking as an integrated part of screening assessment in ASD based on the characteristic elements of the eye gaze. This study adds to the mounting efforts in using eye tracking technology to support the process of ASD screening. METHODS: The proposed approach basically aims to integrate eye tracking with visualization and machine learning. A group of 59 school-aged participants took part in the study. The participants were invited to watch a set of age-appropriate photographs and videos related to social cognition. Initially, eye-tracking scanpaths were transformed into a visual representation as a set of images. Subsequently, a convolutional neural network was trained to perform the image classification task. RESULTS: The experimental results demonstrated that the visual representation could simplify the diagnostic task and also attained high accuracy. Specifically, the convolutional neural network model could achieve a promising classification accuracy. This largely suggests that visualizations could successfully encode the information of gaze motion and its underlying dynamics. Further, we explored possible correlations between the autism severity and the dynamics of eye movement based on the maximal information coefficient. The findings primarily show that the combination of eye tracking, visualization, and machine learning have strong potential in developing an objective tool to assist in the screening of ASD. CONCLUSIONS: Broadly speaking, the approach we propose could be transferable to screening for other disorders, particularly neurodevelopmental disorders.
34694049|a|Understanding whether there is enough evidence to implicate a gene's role in a given disease, as well as the mechanisms by which variants in this gene might cause this disease, is essential to determine clinical relevance. The National Institutes of Health-funded Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen) has developed evaluation frameworks to assess both the strength of evidence supporting a relationship between a gene and disease (gene-disease validity), and whether loss (haploinsufficiency) or gain (triplosensitivity) of individual genes or genomic regions is a mechanism for disease (dosage sensitivity). ClinGen actively applies these frameworks across multiple disease domains, and makes this information publicly available via its website (https://www.clinicalgenome.org/) for use in multiple applications, including clinical variant classification. Here, we describe how the results of these curation processes can be utilized to inform the appropriate application of pathogenicity criteria for both sequence and copy number variants, as well as to guide test development and inform genomic filtering pipelines.
34693989|a|BACKGROUND: Autistic spectrum disorder (ASD) is an increasingly recognised neurodevelopmental condition; that is, a neurologically-based condition which interferes with the acquisition, retention or application of specific skills. ASD is characterised by challenges with socialisation and communication, and by stereotyped and repetitive behaviours. A stereotyped behaviour is one which is repeated over and over again and which seems not to have any useful function. ASD often co-occurs with mental health disorders, including obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD). People with ASD may show certain cognitive differences (i.e. differences in ways of thinking) which influence their response to therapies. Thus, there is a need for evidence-based guidelines to treat mental health issues in this group. OCD, a common condition characterised by repeated obsessional thoughts and compulsive acts, occurs with greater frequency in persons with ASD than in the general population. Genetic, anatomic, neurobiological and psychological factors have been proposed to explain this co-occurrence. However, care should be taken to distinguish stereotyped and repetitive behaviours characteristic of ASD from obsessive compulsive acts in OCD. Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is the recommended treatment for OCD, but studies have suggested that this treatment may be less effective in those with OCD co-occurring with ASD. Hence, modifications to CBT treatment may be helpful when treating OCD co-occurring with ASD to optimise outcomes. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effectiveness of behavioural and cognitive behavioural therapy for obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) in children and adults with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). SEARCH METHODS: We searched for studies in the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE, Embase, PsycINFO, five other bibliographic databases, international trial registries and other sources of grey literature (to 24 August 2020). We checked the reference lists of included studies and relevant systematic reviews to identify additional studies missed from the original electronic searches. We contacted subject experts for further information when needed. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs), cross-over, cluster- and quasi-randomised controlled trials involving both adults and children with diagnoses of OCD and ASD. We included studies of participants with co-occurring conditions (i.e. those experiencing other mental illnesses or neurodevelopmental conditions at the same time), but we did not include individuals who had a co-occurring global learning difficulty. Treatment could be in any setting or format and include behavioural therapy (BT) and cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), which may have been adapted for those with ASD. Comparator interventions included no treatment, waiting list, attention placebo (where the control group receives non-specific aspects of therapy, but not the active ingredient) and treatment as usual (TAU, where the control group receives the usual treatment, according to accepted standards). DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Three review authors independently screened studies for inclusion. The authors extracted relevant data from the one eligible study, assessed the risk of bias and certainty of evidence (GRADE). Outcomes of interest were changes in OCD symptoms and treatment completion (primary outcome), and severity of depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms and behavioural difficulties, as well as degree of family accommodation (secondary outcomes). We did not conduct meta-analyses as only one study met the selection criteria. MAIN RESULTS: We included only one RCT of 46 participants in our analysis. This study compared CBT for OCD in persons with high-functioning ASD with a control group who received anxiety management only. There were no differences in rates of treatment completion between the CBT (87%) and anxiety management (87%) groups (risk ratio (RR) 1.00, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.80 to 1.25; low-certainty evidence). Behavioural difficulties were not included as an outcome measure in the study. This study showed that there may be a benefit at the end of treatment favouring CBT compared with anxiety management in OCD symptoms (mean difference (MD) -3.00, 95% CI -8.02 to 2.02), depression symptoms (MD -1.80, 95% CI -11.50 to 7.90), anxiety symptoms (MD -3.20, 95% CI -11.38 to 4.98), and quality of life (MD 5.20, 95% CI -1.41 to 11.81), but the evidence was of low certainty.  AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Evidence is limited regarding the efficacy of CBT for treatment of OCD in ASD. There is much scope for future study, not only examining the efficacy of CBT for OCD in ASD, but also the particular ways that OCD manifests in and affects people with ASD and the role of the family in treatment response.
34693924|a|OBJECTIVE: Emotional and behavioral problems (EBPs) may co-occur with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and impair children's functioning beyond autism symptomatology. We compared the prevalence of EBPs in youths with or without ASD and evaluated their unique contribution to impairment in ASD. METHODS: We surveyed 1267 children (79.4% boys, mean age: 9.2 years, range: 3-17) recruited at 3 sites in Kaiser Permanente and OCHIN primary care clinical networks, with confirmed International Classification of Diseases-10th ed. diagnosis of ASD (N = 564), asthma (N = 468), or neither (N = 429). Children from the 2 comparison groups were age-matched and sex-matched to the ASD group. EBPs and impairment were measured by the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire and autism symptomatology by the Social Responsiveness Scale in the ASD group only. RESULTS: EBPs and impairment mean scores were significantly (p < 0.001) higher in participants with ASD compared with children from the 2 comparison groups, across sexes and age groups, with no significant difference between the asthma and control groups. Among children with ASD, both EBPs and autistic symptoms were significantly correlated with impairment (r = 0.64 and r = 0.65, respectively) and explained a significant proportion of impairment variance (R2 = 0.525; p < 0.001) in multiple linear regression. In the relative importance analysis, EBPs and autistic symptoms explained comparable proportions of impairment variance (46% and 52%, respectively) with no significant difference between their relative weights (mean difference: 0.03; 95% confidence interval: -0.049 to 0.114). CONCLUSION: Among youth with ASD, high levels of EBPs impair daily functioning as much as autistic symptoms. Systematic detection and management of EBPs may improve functioning and outcomes in youth with ASD.
34693784|a|INTRODUCTION: Patient groups who pose behavioral challenges during dental attendance may be offered more restricted dental treatment options. Unsuccessful participation with dental visit tasks and demands has been commonly reported for autistic children. OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to examine parental perceptions of difficulties associated with dental attendance and oral care for autistic children and young adults, to highlight reported challenges and potential adaptations, and to identify interventions that will encourage positive experiences of dental attendance. METHODS: Qualitative data were gathered through 2 focus groups with parents of primary school and secondary school pupils with autism, interviewed in separate groups. Questions about parents' perceptions of dental attendance and oral care were asked. The groups were audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim. The transcripts were analyzed and initial codes generated. Development of subthemes and themes followed a process of thematic analysis. RESULTS: Parental perceptions, which confirmed data from other studies, included the need for understanding and training, awareness of sensory issues, recognition of the individuality of autistic traits, time and clarity for communication, and factors affecting the confidence of parents to advocate in the clinical environment. Focus group participants identified the critical value of empathizing with an autistic perspective and highlighted the importance of positive oral health messages. They also noted the lack of understanding regarding the complexity of altering self-imposed, ritualistic dietary regimes and attempting to enact good dental preventive habits for their children. CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of data from parent focus groups provided a greater understanding of the needs and responsivity required for successful dental visits for autistic children and young adults. A range of potential interventions was identified and incorporated within a model of needs. Interventions based on Partnership Working, System Change, and Training of Dental Staff could be effective in reducing challenges posed by dental attendance for many children with autism. KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER STATEMENT: Sensory sensitivities, communication difficulties, comorbid intellectual disability, and dental anxiety are barriers to successful participation during dental attendance for autistic children. This research proposes that interventions supporting Partnership Working, System Change, and Training of Dental Staff can reduce challenges posed by dental attendance. The model of interventions developed as part of this project can be used by oral care teams to help reduce barriers and improve the success of dental visits for autistic children.
34693744|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Multi-Sensory Environments (also called sensory or Snoezelen  rooms) are rooms that contain equipment which can create light, sound and touch experiences. Multi-Sensory Environments are often used with autistic children, particularly in schools, but there is no evidence for how best to use them. We investigated whether having control over the sensory equipment in the Multi-Sensory Environment affected how a group of 41 (8 female) autistic children aged 4-12 years behaved. We found that when autistic children could control the sensory equipment, they paid more attention and performed fewer repetitive and sensory behaviours. They also used less stereotyped speech, produced fewer vocalisations and showed lower levels of activity. Other behaviours were not affected. Our findings demonstrate that how a Multi-Sensory Environment is used can impact behaviour and that providing control of sensory changes to autistic children may help create better conditions for learning.
34693405|a|Early diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is crucial for best outcomes to interventions. In this paper, we present a machine learning (ML) approach to ASD diagnosis based on identifying specific behaviors from videos of infants of ages 6 through 36 months. The behaviors of interest include directed gaze towards faces or objects of interest, positive affect, and vocalization. The dataset consists of 2000 videos of 3-minute duration with these behaviors manually coded by expert raters. Moreover, the dataset has statistical features including duration and frequency of the above mentioned behaviors in the video collection as well as independent ASD diagnosis by clinicians. We tackle the ML problem in a two-stage approach. Firstly, we develop deep learning models for automatic identification of clinically relevant behaviors exhibited by infants in a one-on-one interaction setting with parents or expert clinicians. We report baseline results of behavior classification using two methods: (1) image based model (2) facial behavior features based model. We achieve 70% accuracy for smile, 68% accuracy for look face, 67% for look object and 53% accuracy for vocalization. Secondly, we focus on ASD diagnosis prediction by applying a feature selection process to identify the most significant statistical behavioral features and a over and under sampling process to mitigate the class imbalance, followed by developing a baseline ML classifier to achieve an accuracy of 82% for ASD diagnosis.
34692600|a|Despite steadily growing numbers of children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorders (ASD), causative treatment is unavailable. Recently, biological cell therapies involving pluripotent cells have raised hopes towards sustained beneficial outcome. We herein report data of four children diagnosed with ASD, who were treated with autologous, bone marrow (BM)-derived, intrathecally and simultaneously intravenously applied, point-of-care stem cell transplant (SCT). The three boys and one girl received the diagnosis at ages between 2-4 years. The decision to perform the procedure was preceded by limited beneficiary impact of conventional symptom-based, psychological and pharmacological interventions. At ages of 4-14 years the children received their SCT, no immediate or late adverse events were reported. Disappearance of symptoms were observed by the parents during the following year and consequently improved Autism Treatment Evaluation Checklist (ATEC) scores were reported. The SCT procedure, in trained hands, can be a safe and promising treatment option in children with ASD, responding in a non-satisfactory manner to conventional treatments. It is postulated that SCT may, among others, assert its positive effect by counteracting a cerebral inflammatory autoimmune process which in turn supports the responsiveness to behavioral and pharmacological interventions. Our results in this small group are encouraging, but certainly need further investigation in larger cohorts.
34692342|a|Prior research shows that employment programs for individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) fail to address ASD as a heterogeneous disorder and focus on specific ASD traits associated with difficulty in obtaining and maintaining employment. This study provides descriptive evidence that self-perceptions of self-determination improve in young adults with ASD who participate in a residential program that promotes Wehmeyer and Schalock's essential characteristics of self-determined behavior: behavioral autonomy, self-regulated behavior, acting in a psychologically empowered manner, and self-realization. Qualitative surveys were administered to 60 participants (17-28 years old) on perceptions of self-determination, confidence in independent living skills, and program effectiveness regarding case management and sustainable employment. One-sided t-tests using pre- and post-program responses were assessed. Post- versus pre-program means were significantly higher in participants feeling confident to live alone (p = 0.0059). Findings suggest that programs adopting self-determined behavior may be more effective in increasing self-confidence for individuals with ASD. However, these findings warrant long-term analysis to assess the continuity of program success and sustained employment.
34691320|a|Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a multisystemic disease with a wide range of extraintestinal manifestations in both ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, while increasing evidence supports the interaction between gut and central nervous system, described as "gut-brain axis". According to epidemiological studies, it seems that patients with IBD present more frequently with impaired mental status compared to the general population, leading to diagnostic and management problems in this group of patients. The association between IBD and mental disorders, such as dementia and autism spectrum disorders, has not been fully clarified; genetic factors and the gut-brain axis seem to be involved. The purpose of this review is to present and analyze the epidemiological data about this issue, describe the possible pathogenetic mechanisms and discuss some considerations about the management of patients with IBD and impaired mental status.
34690871|a|Maternal asthma in pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of adverse perinatal outcomes. Adverse perinatal outcomes may result in poorer infant developmental outcomes, such as temperament and sensory difficulties. This study aimed to (1) assess differences in temperament and sensory features between infants born to mothers with and without asthma and (2) investigate differences in these infant behaviours as a function of maternal asthma severity and asthma control. Mothers completed the Carey Temperament Scales and the Sensory Profile 2 at either 6 weeks, 6 months, or 12 months postpartum. Overall, we observed no significant differences between infants born to mothers with and without asthma in their temperament or sensory features; scores in both domains fell within the normative range. More infants in the asthma group, however, were reported to be highly distractible. When compared with normative data, infants in both groups were reported to have poor predictability of biological functions and fewer infants engaged in low levels of sensory behaviours. Some infants were observed to experience difficulties with hyper-reactivity within several domains. Maternal asthma severity and control during pregnancy were not linked to significant differences between infant temperament and sensory features. The present findings indicate that infants born to mothers with asthma are not at an increased risk overall for temperament or sensory difficulties, compared to control infants. However, a subset of infants across both groups may be at risk for attention or sensory hyper-reactivity difficulties. Further research into the developmental outcomes of infants born to mothers with asthma is warranted.
34690837|a|Evidence-based social skills interventions for young adults are limited, despite social difficulties in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) persisting after transition to adulthood. The Program for the Education and Enrichment of Relational Skills for Young Adults (PEERS -YA) is an evidence-based intervention found to be effective in improving relational skills in young adults with ASD. To translate the original American version of the PEERS -YA treatment manual into Korean, intensive interviews were performed. Based on results from interviews, several rules of dating etiquette and social activities were modified to be culturally sensitive and linguistically appropriate. Next, young adults diagnosed with ASD (18-35 years of age; IQ > 70) and their social coaches were recruited for the randomized controlled trial (RCT). Participants were randomly assigned either to a treatment group (TG; n = 19) or a delayed treatment group (DTG; n = 18). In the analysis of group differences in the TG and DTG, social skills knowledge was improved. The within group analyses showed positive effects of improving social skills knowledge on reducing depression and anxiety symptoms. After modest cultural adaptations focusing on dating and social activities, the implementation of the PEERS -YA-K was found feasible for the Korean community. This is one of only a few cross-cultural validation trials establishing evidence-based treatment in young adults with ASD. Clinical Trial Registration: This trial was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier: NCT03310775.
34690833|a|Background: Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is a monogenic disorder characterized by high rates of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and anxiety. A longstanding "hyperarousal hypothesis" in FXS has argued that ANS dysfunction underpins many symptoms of FXS. However, the developmental onset and trajectory of ANS dysfunction, as well as the consequences of ANS dysfunction on later psychiatric symptoms, remain poorly understood in FXS. Insight into the emergence, trajectory, and consequences of ANS dysfunction across early development in FXS has critical implications for prevention, intervention, and optimal outcomes in both typical and atypical development. This longitudinal study investigated whether and when males with FXS evidence atypical ANS function from infancy through early childhood, and how trajectories of ANS function across infancy and early childhood predict ASD and anxiety symptom severity later in development. Methods: Participants included 73 males with FXS and 79 age-matched typically developing (TD) males. Baseline heart activity was recorded at multiple assessments between 3 and 83 months of age, resulting in 372 observations. General arousal and parasympathetic activity were indexed via interbeat interval (IBI) and respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA), respectively. ASD and anxiety symptoms were assessed at 36 months of age or later in a subgroup of participants (FXS n = 28; TD n = 25). Results: Males with FXS exhibited atypical patterns of developmental change in ANS function across infancy and early childhood. As a result, ANS dysfunction became progressively more discrepant across time, with the FXS group exhibiting significantly shorter IBI and lower RSA by 29 and 24 months of age, respectively. Shorter IBI at 24 months and a flatter IBI slope across development predicted elevated anxiety symptoms, but not ASD symptoms, later in childhood in both FXS and TD males. Reduced RSA at 24 months predicted elevated ASD symptoms, but not anxiety symptoms, in both groups. Developmental change in RSA across early development did not predict later anxiety or ASD symptoms. Conclusion: This is the first longitudinal study to examine the "hyperarousal hypothesis" in infants and young children with FXS. Findings suggest that hyperarousal (i.e., shorter IBI, lower RSA) is evident in males with FXS by 24-29 months of age. Interestingly, unique aspects of early ANS function differentially relate to later ASD and anxiety symptoms. General arousal, indexed by shorter IBI that becomes progressively more discrepant from TD controls, predicts later anxiety symptoms. In contrast, parasympathetic-related factors, indexed by lower levels of RSA, predict ASD symptoms. These findings support the "hyperarousal hypothesis" in FXS, in that ANS dysfunction evident early in development predicts later-emerging symptoms of ASD and anxiety. This study also have important implications for the development of targeted treatments and interventions that could potentially mitigate the long-term effects of hyperarousal in FXS.
34690832|a|The mechanisms underlying the common association between autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and sensory processing disorders (SPD) are unclear, and treatment options to reduce atypical sensory processing are limited. Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) is a leading genetic cause of intellectual disability and ASD behaviors. As in most children with ASD, atypical sensory processing is a common symptom in FXS, frequently manifesting as sensory hypersensitivity. Auditory hypersensitivity is a highly debilitating condition in FXS that may lead to language delays, social anxiety and ritualized repetitive behaviors. Animal models of FXS, including Fmr1 knock out (KO) mouse, also show auditory hypersensitivity, providing a translation relevant platform to study underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. The focus of this review is to summarize recent studies in the Fmr1 KO mouse that identified neural correlates of auditory hypersensitivity. We review results of electroencephalography (EEG) recordings in the Fmr1 KO mice and highlight EEG phenotypes that are remarkably similar to EEG findings in humans with FXS. The EEG phenotypes associated with the loss of FMRP include enhanced resting EEG gamma band power, reduced cross frequency coupling, reduced sound-evoked synchrony of neural responses at gamma band frequencies, increased event-related potential amplitudes, reduced habituation of neural responses and increased non-phase locked power. In addition, we highlight the postnatal period when the EEG phenotypes develop and show a strong association of the phenotypes with enhanced matrix-metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) activity, abnormal development of parvalbumin (PV)-expressing inhibitory interneurons and reduced formation of specialized extracellular matrix structures called perineuronal nets (PNNs). Finally, we discuss how dysfunctions of inhibitory PV interneurons may contribute to cortical hyperexcitability and EEG abnormalities observed in FXS. Taken together, the studies reviewed here indicate that EEG recordings can be utilized in both pre-clinical studies and clinical trials, while at the same time, used to identify cellular and circuit mechanisms of dysfunction in FXS. New therapeutic approaches that reduce MMP-9 activity and restore functions of PV interneurons may succeed in reducing FXS sensory symptoms. Future studies should examine long-lasting benefits of developmental vs. adult interventions on sensory phenotypes.
34690830|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a group of neurodevelopmental disorders associated with deficits in social communication and restrictive, repetitive patterns of behavior, that affect up to 1 in 54 children. ASDs clearly demonstrate a male bias, occurring ~4 times more frequently in males than females, though the basis for this male predominance is not well-understood. In recent years, ASD risk gene discovery has accelerated, with many whole-exome sequencing studies identifying genes that converge on common pathways, such as neuronal communication and regulation of gene expression. ASD genetics studies have suggested that there may be a "female protective effect," such that females may have a higher threshold for ASD risk, yet its etiology is not well-understood. Here, we review common biological pathways implicated by ASD genetics studies as well as recent analyses of sex differential processes in ASD using imaging genomics, transcriptomics, and animal models. Additionally, we discuss recent investigations of ASD risk genes that have suggested a potential role for estrogens as modulators of biological pathways in ASD, and highlight relevant molecular and cellular pathways downstream of estrogen signaling as potential avenues for further investigation.
34690787|a|Background: Fragile X syndrome (FXS), the most common single-gene cause of intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), is caused by a >200-trinucleotide repeat expansion in the 5' untranslated region of the fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene. Individuals with FXS can present with a range of neurobehavioral impairments including, but not limited to: cognitive, language, and adaptive deficits; ASD; anxiety; social withdrawal and avoidance; and aggression. Decreased expression of the gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptor delta subunit and deficient GABAergic tonic inhibition could be associated with symptoms of FXS. Gaboxadol (OV101) is a delta-subunit-selective, extrasynaptic GABAA receptor agonist that enhances GABAergic tonic inhibition, providing the rationale for assessment of OV101 as a potential targeted treatment of FXS. No drug is approved in the United States for the treatment of FXS. Methods: This 12-weeks, randomized (1:1:1), double-blind, parallel-group, phase 2a study was designed to assess the safety, tolerability, efficacy, and optimal daily dose of OV101 5 mg [once (QD), twice (BID), or three-times daily (TID)] when administered for 12 weeks to adolescent and adult men with FXS. Safety was the primary study objective, with key assessments including treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs), treatment-related adverse events leading to study discontinuation, and serious adverse events (SAEs). The secondary study objective was to evaluate the effect of OV101 on a variety of problem behaviors. Results: A total of 23 participants with FXS (13 adolescents, 10 adults) with moderate-to-severe neurobehavioral phenotypes (Full Scale Intelligence Quotient, 41.5 +- 3.29; ASD, 82.6%) were randomized to OV101 5 mg QD (n = 8), 5 mg BID (n = 8), or 5 mg TID (n = 7) for 12 weeks. OV101 was well tolerated across all 3 treatment regimens. The most common TEAEs were upper respiratory tract infection (n = 4), headache (n = 3), diarrhea (n = 2), and irritability (n = 2). No SAEs were reported. Improvements from baseline to end-of-treatment were observed on several efficacy endpoints, and 60% of participants were identified as treatment responders based on Clinical Global Impressions-Improvement. Conclusions: Overall, OV101 was safe and well tolerated. Efficacy results demonstrate an initial signal for OV101 in individuals with FXS. These results need to be confirmed in a larger, randomized, placebo-controlled study with optimal outcomes and in the most appropriate age group. Clinical Trial Registration: www.ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier: NCT03697161.
34690776|a|We investigated the association between genetic variations in pharmacodynamic genes and risperidone-induced increased prolactin levels in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). In a retrospective study, variants of pharmacodynamic genes were analyzed in 124 ASD patients treated with a risperidone regimen for at least 3 months. To simplify genotype interpretation, we created an algorithm to calculate the dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2) gene genetic risk score. There was no relationship between prolactin levels and single SNPs. However, the H1/H3 diplotype (A2/A2-Cin/Cin-A/G) of DRD2/ankyrin repeat and kinase domain containing 1 (ANKK1) Taq1A, DRD2 -141C indel, and DRD2 -141A>G, which had a genetic risk score of 5.5, was associated with the highest median prolactin levels (23 ng/ml). As the dose-corrected plasma levels of risperidone, 9-OH-risperidone, and the active moiety increased, prolactin levels in patients carrying the H1/H3 diplotype were significantly higher than those of the other diplotypes. DRD2 diplotypes showed significantly high prolactin levels as plasma risperidone levels increased. Lower levels of prolactin were detected in patients who responded to risperidone. This is the first system for describing DRD2 haplotypes using genetic risk scores based on their protein expression. Clinicians should consider using pharmacogenetic-based decision-making in clinical practice to prevent prolactin increase.
34690695|a|Chemical synapses provide a vital foundation for neuron-neuron communication and overall brain function. By tethering closely apposed molecular machinery for presynaptic neurotransmitter release and postsynaptic signal transduction, circuit- and context- specific synaptic properties can drive neuronal computations for animal behavior. Trans-synaptic signaling via synaptic cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) serves as a promising mechanism to generate the molecular diversity of chemical synapses. Neuroligins (Nlgns) were discovered as postsynaptic CAMs that can bind to presynaptic CAMs like Neurexins (Nrxns) at the synaptic cleft. Among the four (Nlgn1-4) or five (Nlgn1-3, Nlgn4X, and Nlgn4Y) isoforms in rodents or humans, respectively, Nlgn3 has a heterogeneous expression and function at particular subsets of chemical synapses and strong association with non-syndromic autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Several lines of evidence have suggested that the unique expression and function of Nlgn3 protein underlie circuit-specific dysfunction characteristic of non-syndromic ASD caused by the disruption of Nlgn3 gene. Furthermore, recent studies have uncovered the molecular mechanism underlying input cell-dependent expression of Nlgn3 protein at hippocampal inhibitory synapses, in which trans-synaptic signaling of specific alternatively spliced isoforms of Nlgn3 and Nrxn plays a critical role. In this review article, we overview the molecular, anatomical, and physiological knowledge about Nlgn3, focusing on the circuit-specific function of mammalian Nlgn3 and its underlying molecular mechanism. This will provide not only new insight into specific Nlgn3-mediated trans-synaptic interactions as molecular codes for synapse specification but also a better understanding of the pathophysiological basis for non-syndromic ASD associated with functional impairment in Nlgn3 gene.
34690671|a|Altered excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission has been implicated in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Interventions using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) to enhance or inhibit cortical excitability are under study for various targets, though the mechanistic effects of rTMS have yet to be examined in ASD. Here, we examined whether an excitatory rTMS treatment course modulates glutamatergic (Glx) or gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) metabolite levels in emerging adults with ASD. Twenty-eight participants with ASD and executive function impairment [23.3 +- 4.69 years; seven-female] underwent two magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) scans of the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). MRS scans were acquired before and after participants with ASD were randomized to receive a 20-session course of active or sham rTMS to the DLPFC. Baseline MRS data was available for 19 typically developing controls [23.8 +- 4.47 years; six-female]. Metabolite levels for Glx and GABA+ were compared between ASD and control groups, at baseline, and metabolite level change, pre-to-post-rTMS treatment, was compared in ASD participants that underwent active vs. sham rTMS. Absolute change in Glx was greater in the active vs. sham-rTMS group [F (1, 19) = 6.54, p = 0.02], though the absolute change in GABA+ did not differ between groups. We also examined how baseline metabolite levels related to pre/post-rTMS metabolite level change, in the active vs. sham groups. rTMS group moderated the relation between baseline Glx and pre-to-post-rTMS Glx change, such that baseline Glx predicted Glx change in the active-rTMS group only [b = 1.52, SE = 0.32, t (18) = 4.74, p < 0.001]; Glx levels increased when baseline levels were lower, and decreased when baseline levels were higher. Our results indicate that an interventional course of excitatory rTMS to the DLPFC may modulate local Glx levels in emerging adults with ASD, and align with prior reports of glutamatergic alterations following rTMS. Interventional studies that track glutamatergic markers may provide mechanistic insights into the therapeutic potential of rTMS in ASD. Clinical Trial Registration: Clinicaltrials.gov (ID: NCT02311751), https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02311751?term=ameis&rank=1; NCT02311751.
34689849|a|Despite the important social functions of moral emotions, they are understudied in the autism spectrum disorder (ASD) population. This three-wave longitudinal study is among the first to examine the development of moral emotions and their associations with theory of mind in 3- to 7-year-old children with ASD, using observational tasks. One hundred and forty-two children (52 with ASD) were followed over a period of 2 years. We found that while the expressions of shame and guilt remained stable in non-ASD children, they decreased with age in children with ASD. No group differences were found in the levels or the developmental trajectories of pride. Besides, better false-belief understanding was uniquely related to the expressions of pride in children with ASD. Our findings highlight the importance of enhancing understanding of moral emotion development and related factors in children with ASD.
34689816|a|BACKGROUND: Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC), a multi-system genetic disorder, is associated with a wide range of TSC-Associated Neuropsychiatric Disorders (TAND). Individuals have apparently unique TAND profiles, challenging diagnosis, psycho-education, and intervention planning. We proposed that identification of natural TAND clusters could lead to personalized identification and treatment of TAND. Two small-scale studies showed cluster and factor analysis could identify clinically meaningful natural TAND clusters. Here we set out to identify definitive natural TAND clusters in a large, international dataset. METHOD: Cross-sectional, anonymized TAND Checklist data of 453 individuals with TSC were collected from six international sites. Data-driven methods were used to identify natural TAND clusters. Mean squared contingency coefficients were calculated to produce a correlation matrix, and various cluster analyses and exploratory factor analysis were examined. Statistical robustness of clusters was evaluated with 1000-fold bootstrapping, and internal consistency calculated with Cronbach's alpha. RESULTS: Ward's method rendered seven natural TAND clusters with good robustness on bootstrapping. Cluster analysis showed significant convergence with an exploratory factor analysis solution, and, with the exception of one cluster, internal consistency of the emerging clusters was good to excellent. Clusters showed good clinical face validity. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings identified a data-driven set of natural TAND clusters from within highly variable TAND Checklist data. The seven natural TAND clusters could be used to train families and professionals and to develop tailored approaches to identification and treatment of TAND. Natural TAND clusters may also have differential aetiological underpinnings and responses to molecular and other treatments.
34689709|a|OBJECTIVE: This study employed network analysis to characterize central autism spectrum disorder (ASD) traits and suicide symptoms within an active duty military sample as well as to identify symptoms that may bridge between ASD traits and suicidality (i.e., suicidal ideation and behaviors). METHOD: Participants were active duty U.S. military service members (N = 287). Autism spectrum traits, suicidality, depression, and suicide related constructs were assessed online via self-report. RESULTS: Within the combined ASD trait-suicidality network, suicide rumination, suicide behaviors, and depression had the highest strength centrality. The most central bridge symptoms between ASD and suicidality were thwarted belongingness, social skills deficits, and depressive symptoms. CONCLUSIONS: Social skills deficits and thwarted belongingness may function as a meaningful bridge between ASD symptoms and suicidality within active duty members. Individuals with ASD symptoms who additionally present with high levels of thwarted belongingness and/or considerable social skills deficits may be at increased risk for suicidality.HIGHLIGHTSWithin an ASD-suicidality network, social skills deficits, low belonging, and depression had the greatest bridge strength.Although low belonging emerged as a bridge symptom, perceived burdensomeness did not.Suicide rumination, suicide behaviors, and depression were the most central symptom in an ASD-suicidality network.Symptoms related to social skills deficits may connect ASD traits and suicidality.
34689686|a|OBJECTIVE: The purpose of our study was to investigated the anti-Yo, anti-Hu, anti-Ri, anti-amphiphysin antibody levels and 8-OHdG in mothers of children with autism. METHODS: This study included 60 participants, 33 of whom were healthy mothers of 3-12-year-old children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and the 27 others who constituted the control group, were healthy mothers with age-matched healthy children. Two groups were examined for plasma anti-Yo, anti-Hu, anti-amphiphysin and anti-Ri antibodies and, 8-OHdG levels. The participants were asked to accomplish a sociodemographic data form. The severity of ASD symptoms was evaluated according to the Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS). RESULTS: Anti-amphiphysin antibody levels and anti-Ri antibody positivity were significantly higher in the case group (p = 0.001; p = 0.027, respectively). The two groups did not significantly differ in terms of anti-Yo and anti-Hu antibody levels and in terms of 8-OHdG levels (p = 0.065; p = 0.099; p = 0.490, respectively). The two groups did not significantly differ in terms of sociodemographic data (p > 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: According to the our study, maternal antineuronal antibodies, such as anti-amphiphysin and anti-Ri, may contribute to the risk of childhood autism. Studies with larger samples are needed.KEY POINTSMaternal factors associated with autism should be investigated in order to create early diagnosis and treatment opportunities for autism.Based on the importance of immunological and cerebellar pathologies in autism aetiology, we aimed to investigate antineuronal antibodies in mothers of children with autism.Maternal antineuronal antibodies, such as anti-amphiphysin and anti-Ri, may contribute to the risk of childhood autism.High anti-amphiphysin antibody levels in mothers of children with autism may also occur against the amphiphysin in the structure of the SrGAP3 gene, which is associated with autism.
34689580|a|Past research has identified shifts in the demographics and co-occurring mental health issues of youth referred to certain gender dysphoria services. The present study examined shifts in demographics (age, sex and social transition status), social adversity (bullying experiences and abuse) and psychological functioning (mood, anxiety, suicidality and autism spectrum disorder) at time of referral (of both children and adolescents) to the Gender Identity Development Service, London between the years of 2012 and 2015. Patients were 782 children and adolescents (M = 13.94, SD = 2.94, range 4-17; 63.8% assigned female at birth). Little change in sex ratio or age was observed between these two time points. However, we observed greater rates of depression and anxiety of birth-assigned females (but not birth-assigned males) in the more recent cohort, at the same time that reported social adversity (bullying and abuse) was falling. Also, of interest, the proportion of young people who had partially or fully socially transitioned prior to contact with the service had increased overtime. We discuss potential factors driving these shifts and their implications for supporting recent cohorts of gender diverse young people.
34689486|a|OBJECTIVE: To determine the diagnostic importance of using an exome-based multigene panel in childhood epilepsy. STUDY DESIGN: Observational study. PLACE AND DURATION OF STUDY: Department of Medical Genetics, Diskapi Yildirim Beyazid Training and Research Hospital, from January 2017 to May 2020. METHODOLOGY: The phenotype-genotype relationship was investigated in 35 pediatric patients (aged 18 years or younger) with epilepsy, using a large gene panel comprising 464 epilepsy-related genes. The exome-based panel was used to analyse secondary findings.   Results: The diagnostic yield of the targeted multi-gene panel used was 20% (7/35). The causative genes identified in seven patients (5 boys, 2 girls) were CACNA1E, RELN, PRRT2, TSC1, GABRG2, SCN2A, and SHH. Four of the detected disease-related variants were defined as the novel. Secondary findings in various genes were detected in 19 of the patients. Seven patients with causal genes and the remaining 28 patients were compared in terms of parameters such as gender, mental retardation, developmental retardation, autism, hypotonia, seizure phenotype (only), seizure phenotype (plus), magnetic resonance imaging, degree of kinship of their parents and number of relatives with epilepsy. In addition, patients were evaluated statistically in terms of the same parameters by grouping them according to their gender. There was no statistically significant difference in either study (p >0.05). CONCLUSION: Genetic testing is an important tool for clinicians in determining the diagnosis, management, and treatment strategies of epilepsy patients. Key Words: Epilepsy, Diagnostic yield, Exome-based multigene panel, Next-generation sequencing, Seconder findings.
34689027|a|BACKGROUND: Severe to profound intellectual disability (SPID) is associated with multiple neurodevelopmental disorders and problems. In the most severe cases, the term profound intellectual and multiple disabilities (PIMD) is used. This study aimed to explore the co-occurring disorders and neurodevelopmental problems in a sample of twins where the proband had SPID. METHOD: Within a population-based sample of (30 312) twins, 20 individuals with a national patient register SPID diagnosis were identified. Parent telephone interview data (screening of neurodevelopmental disorders) and register data (APGAR, birth weight, intellectual disabilities, epilepsy, motor and sensory disorders) were gathered for probands and co-twins. RESULTS: The 20 individuals with SPID all had between one and five additional disorders or problems, with autistic traits, motor problems and epilepsy being the most common. Clear discordance was found for ID and all additional disorders and problems between probands with SPID and their non-SPID co-twins. CONCLUSION: Children with SPID almost never present without neurodevelopmental and/or sensory and/or motor comorbidities. This heterogeneity should be reflected in clinical routine and in research targeting individuals with SPID. The results support a previously suggested conceptualization of a S/PIMD "spectrum". Autism may be considered for inclusion in future elaborations of such a S/PIMD spectrum.
34688922|a|BACKGROUND: Anxiety is one of the most common co-occurring conditions in people with autism spectrum disorder. The amygdala has been identified as related to anxiety in populations with and without autism, yet associations in autism were based on relatively small or developmentally constrained samples, leaving questions as to whether these results hold at different developmental ages and in a larger, more robust sample. METHODS: Structural neuroimaging and parent report of anxiety symptoms of children aged 5 to 13 with (n = 123) and without (n = 171) a diagnosis of autism were collected from the University of Maryland and three sites from the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange. Standardized residuals for bilateral amygdala volumes were computed adjusting for site, hemispheric volumes, and covariates (age, sex, Full Scale Intelligence Quotient). RESULTS: Clinically significant anxiety symptoms did not differentiate amygdala volumes between groups (i.e., autism and anxiety, autism without anxiety, without autism or anxiety). No significant association between left or right amygdala volumes and anxiety scores was observed among the sample of individuals with autism. Meta-analytic and Bayes Factor estimations provided additional support for the null hypothesis. Age, sex, and autism severity did not moderate associations between anxiety and amygdala volumes. CONCLUSIONS: No relation between amygdala volumes and anxiety symptoms in children with autism was observed in the largest sample to investigate this question. We discuss directions for future research to determine whether additional factors including age or method of assessment may contribute to this lack of association.
34687698|a|Altered performance monitoring is implicated in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), Gilles de la Tourette syndrome (GTS), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and autism. We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of electrophysiological correlates of performance monitoring (error-related negativity, ERN; error positivity, Pe; feedback-related negativity, FRN; feedback-P3) in individuals with OCD, GTS, ADHD or autism compared to control participants, or associations between correlates and symptoms/traits of these conditions. Meta-analyses on 97 studies (5890 participants) showed increased ERN in OCD (Hedge's g = 0.54[CIs:0.44,0.65]) and GTS (g = 0.99[CIs:0.05,1.93]). OCD also showed increased Pe (g = 0.51[CIs:0.21,0.81]) and FRN (g = 0.50[CIs:0.26,0.73]). ADHD and autism showed reduced ERN (ADHD: g=-0.47[CIs:-0.67,-0.26]; autism: g=-0.61[CIs:-1.10,-0.13]). ADHD also showed reduced Pe (g=-0.50[CIs:-0.69,-0.32]). These findings suggest overlap in electrophysiological markers of performance monitoring alterations in four common neurodevelopmental conditions, with increased amplitudes of the markers in OCD and GTS and decreased amplitudes in ADHD and autism. Implications of these findings in terms of shared and distinct performance monitoring alterations across these neurodevelopmental conditions are discussed. PROSPERO pre-registration code: CRD42019134612.
34687351|a|Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) are ubiquitous persistent organic pollutants (POPs) that are known neuroendocrine disrupting chemicals with adverse neurodevelopmental effects. PBDEs may act as risk factors for autism spectrum disorders (ASD), characterized by abnormal psychosocial functioning, although direct evidence is currently lacking. Using a translational exposure model, we tested the hypothesis that maternal transfer of a commercial mixture of PBDEs, DE-71, produces ASD-relevant behavioral and neurochemical deficits in female offspring. C57Bl6/N mouse dams (F0) were exposed to DE-71 via oral administration of 0 (VEH/CON), 0.1 (L-DE-71) or 0.4 (H-DE-71) mg/kg bw/d from 3 wk prior to gestation through end of lactation. Mass spectrometry analysis indicated in utero and lactational transfer of PBDEs (in ppb) to F1 female offspring brain tissue at postnatal day (PND) 15 which was reduced by PND 110. Neurobehavioral testing of social novelty preference (SNP) and social recognition memory (SRM) revealed that adult L-DE-71 F1 offspring display deficient short- and long-term SRM, in the absence of reduced sociability, and increased repetitive behavior. These effects were concomitant with reduced olfactory discrimination of social odors. Additionally, L-DE-71 exposure also altered short-term novel object recognition memory but not anxiety or depressive-like behavior. Moreover, F1 L-DE-71 displayed downregulated mRNA transcripts for oxytocin (Oxt) in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) and supraoptic nucleus, and vasopressin (Avp) in the BNST and upregulated Avp1ar in BNST, and Oxtr in the paraventricular nucleus. Our work demonstrates that developmental PBDE exposure produces ASD-relevant neurochemical, olfactory processing and behavioral phenotypes that may result from early neurodevelopmental reprogramming within central social and memory networks.
34687079|a|Neurological and neuronal disorders are associated with structural, biochemical, or electrical abnormalities in the nervous system. Many neurological diseases have not yet been discovered. Interventions used for the treatment of these disorders include avoidance measures, lifestyle changes, physiotherapy, neurorehabilitation, pain management, medication, and surgery. In the sodium channelopathies, alterations in the structure, expression, and function of voltage-gated sodium channels (VGSCs) are considered as the causes of neurological and neuronal diseases. Online databases, including Scopus, Science Direct, Google Scholar, and PubMed were assessed for studies published between 1977 and 2020 using the keywords of review, sodium channels blocker, neurological diseases, and neuronal diseases. VGSCs consist of one alpha subunit and two beta subunits. These subunits are known to regulate the gating kinetics, functional characteristics, and localization of the ion channel. These channels are involved in cell migration, cellular connections, neuronal pathfinding, and neurite outgrowth. Through the VGSC, the action potential is triggered and propagated in the neurons. Action potentials are physiological functions and passage of impermeable ions. The electrophysiological properties of these channels and their relationship with neurological and neuronal disorders have been identified. Subunit mutations are involved in the development of diseases, such as epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, autism, and Alzheimer's disease. Accordingly, we conducted a review of the link between VGSCs and neurological and neuronal diseases. Also, novel therapeutic targets were introduced for future drug discoveries.
34686651|a|The chromatin remodeler CHD8, which belongs to the ATP-dependent chromatin remodelers CHD family, is one of the most high-risk mutated genes in autism spectrum disorders. However, the role of CHD8 in neural differentiation and the mechanism of CHD8 in autism remains unclear, despite there are a few studies based on the CHD8 haploinsufficient models. Here, we generate the CHD8 knockout human ESCs by CRISPR/Cas9 technology and characterize the effect of loss-of-function of CHD8 on pluripotency maintenance and lineage determination by utilizing efficient directed differentiation protocols. The results show loss-of-function of CHD8 does not affect human ESC maintenance although having slight effect on proliferation and cell cycle. Interestingly, CHD8 depletion results in defective neuroectoderm differentiation, along with severe cell death in neural progenitor stage. Transcriptome analysis also indicates CHD8 does not alter the expression of pluripotent genes in ESC stage, but in neural progenitor cells depletion of CHD8 induces the abnormal expression of the apoptosis genes and suppresses neuroectoderm-related genes. These results provide the evidence that CHD8 plays an essential role in the pluripotency exit and neuroectoderm differentiation as well as the regulation of apoptosis during neurogenesis.
34686441|a|
34686440|a|
34686160|a|BACKGROUND: The behavioral characteristics of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are not only affected by their disease, but also by their parenting environment. HR-ASD has the risk of developing internalization and externalization problems. How the early development of these behavioral problems is affected by parent-child interaction is worth exploring. We tested whether parent-child interactions and parenting characteristics were associated with behavioural problems during the infant periods. METHODS: This study collected data from 91 infants at high risk for ASD and 68 matched typically developing (TD) infants, about their internalizing and externalizing behavioural problems and engagement states (i.e. positive, negative, and parent-child interactions), using free play paradigm. Parent measures were assessed using the Broad Autism Phenotypic Questionnaire (BAPQ) and Parenting Stress Index Short Form (PSI-SF) questionnaire. The core symptoms of ASD were assessed using the the Autism Diagnostic Observational Schedule (ADOS). RESULTS: During free play, infants in the HR-ASD group showed more internalizing (P < 0.001) and externalizing (P < 0.05) behaviours and less positive engagement (P < 0.01) than the TD group. In the regression analysis, we found that parenting stress had an impact on the infants' externalizing behaviours ( R2 = 0.215). Parent negative engagement had an impact on the infants' internalizing behaviours ( R2 = 0.451). CONCLUSIONS: The present study revealed that children at high risk for ASD exhibited more severe internalizing and externalizing behavioural problems than TD group. The parent negative engagement is associated with behavioural problems. The findings on the contribution of parents' factors to behavioural problems suggests that the parenting stress and parent-child interactions are important factors for mitigating behavioural problems.
34686159|a|BACKGROUND: Antipsychotic prescribing to Medicaid-enrolled youth has been the target of numerous policy initiatives, including prior authorization and quality monitoring programs, which often target specific populations. Whether these efforts have changed the level or composition of antipsychotic prescribing is unclear. METHODS: Using 2014-2018 administrative claims data for Medicaid enrollees aged 21 years and under in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, we measured antipsychotic prescription fills overall and for youth without an approved indication (autism, bipolar disorder, or psychosis). We then assessed whether trends differed for populations that have been targeted by policy initiatives, including younger children and foster care-enrolled youth. We also identified the most common approved and unapproved indications and examined whether the treatment duration of antipsychotic prescriptions differed based on whether the youth had an approved or unapproved indication. RESULTS: Overall, the number of Medicaid youth with an antipsychotic prescription fill halved between 2014 and 2018. Youth aged 17 years and under and foster care-enrolled youth, who were targeted by prior authorization and quality improvement efforts, experienced larger declines. Roughly half of prescriptions were for unapproved indications in both 2014 and 2018; the most common unapproved indication was ADHD, and the treatment duration was shorter for unapproved indications compared to approved indications. CONCLUSIONS: Antipsychotic prescribing to Medicaid-enrolled youth is declining, particularly among populations that have been targeted by policy initiatives like prior authorization and quality monitoring programs. Despite the fact that these initiatives often assess diagnostic criteria, half of antipsychotic prescriptions were for unapproved indications in both 2014 and 2018. More research is needed to gauge whether this prescribing is appropriate.
34685703|a|IQSEC2 is a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) for ADP-ribosylation factor 6 (Arf6), of which protein is exclusively localized to the postsynaptic density of the excitatory synapse. Human genome studies have revealed that the IQSEC2 gene is associated with X-linked neurodevelopmental disorders, such as intellectual disability (ID), epilepsy, and autism. In this study, we examined the behavior and synapse function in IQSEC2 knockout (KO) mice that we generated using CRIPSR/Cas9-mediated genome editing to solve the relevance between IQSEC2 deficiency and the pathophysiology of neurodevelopmental disorders. IQSEC2 KO mice exhibited autistic behaviors, such as overgrooming and social deficits. We identified that up-regulation of c-Fos expression in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) induced by social stimulation was significantly attenuated in IQSEC2 KO mice. Whole cell electrophysiological recording identified that synaptic transmissions mediated by alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor (AMPAR), N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR), and gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor (GABAR) were significantly decreased in pyramidal neurons in layer 5 of the mPFC in IQSEC2 KO mice. Reexpression of IQSEC2 isoform 1 in the mPFC of IQSEC2 KO mice using adeno-associated virus (AAV) rescued both synaptic and social deficits, suggesting that impaired synaptic function in the mPFC is responsible for social deficits in IQSEC2 KO mice.
34685590|a|The alteration of excitatory-inhibitory (E-I) balance has been implicated in various neurological and psychiatric diseases, including autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is a single-gene disorder that is the most common known cause of ASD. Understanding the molecular and physiological features of FXS is thought to enhance our knowledge of the pathophysiology of ASD. Accumulated evidence implicates deficits in the inhibitory circuits in FXS that tips E-I balance toward excitation. Deficits in interneurons, the main source of an inhibitory neurotransmitter, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), have been reported in FXS, including a reduced number of cells, reduction in intrinsic cellular excitability, or weaker synaptic connectivity. Manipulating the interneuron activity ameliorated the symptoms in the FXS mouse model, which makes it reasonable to conceptualize FXS as an interneuronopathy. While it is still poorly understood how the developmental profiles of the inhibitory circuit go awry in FXS, recent works have uncovered several developmental alterations in the functional properties of interneurons. Correcting disrupted E-I balance by potentiating the inhibitory circuit by targeting interneurons may have a therapeutic potential in FXS. I will review the recent evidence about the inhibitory alterations and interneuron dysfunction in ASD and FXS and will discuss the future directions of this field.
34684552|a|Eating behavior problems are characteristic of children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) with a highly restricted range of food choices, which may pose an associated risk of nutritional problems. Hence, detailed knowledge of the dietary patterns (DPs) and nutrient intakes of ASD patients is necessary to carry out intervention strategies if required. The present study aimed to determine the DPs and macro-and micronutrient intakes in a sample of Spanish preschool children with ASD compared to typically developing control children. Fifty-four children with ASD (two to six years of age) diagnosed with ASD according to the Diagnostic Manual-5 criteria), and a control group of 57 typically developing children of similar ages were recruited. A validated food frequency questionnaire was used, and the intake of energy and nutrients was estimated through three non-consecutive 24-h dietary registrations. DPs were assessed using principal component analysis and hierarchical clustering analysis. Children with ASD exhibited a DP characterized by high energy and fat intakes and a low intake of vegetables and fruits. Likewise, meat intake of any type, both lean and fatty, was associated with higher consumption of fish and dietary fat. Furthermore, the increased consumption of dairy products was associated with increased consumption of cereals and pasta. In addition, they had frequent consumption of manufactured products with poor nutritional quality, e.g., beverages, sweets, snacks and bakery products. The percentages of children with ASD complying with the adequacy of nutrient intakes were higher for energy, saturated fat, calcium, and vitamin C, and lower for iron, iodine, and vitamins of group B when compared with control children. In conclusion, this study emphasizes the need to assess the DPs and nutrient intakes of children with ASD to correct their alterations and discard some potential nutritional diseases.
34684493|a|Autism is a group of neurodevelopmental disorders, characterized by early onset difficulties in social communication and restricted, repetitive behaviors and interests. It is characterized by familial aggregation, suggesting that genetic factors play a role in disease development, in addition to developmentally early environmental factors. Here, we review the role of the gut microbiome in autism, as it has been characterized in case-control studies. We discuss how methodological differences may have led to inconclusive or contradictory results, even though a disproportion between harmful and beneficial bacteria is generally described in autism. Furthermore, we review the studies concerning the effects of gut microbial-based and dietary interventions on autism symptoms. Also, in this case, the results are not comparable due to the lack of standardized methods. Therefore, autism-specific microbiome signatures and, consequently, possible microbiome-oriented interventions are far from being recognized. We argue that a multi-omic longitudinal implementation may be useful to study metabolic changes connected to microbiome changes.
34684301|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by social and behavioral impairments. Recent studies have suggested that gut microbiota play a critical role in ASD pathogenesis. Herein, we investigated the fecal microflora of Korean ASD children to determine gut microbiota profiles associated with ASD. Specifically, fecal samples were obtained from 54 children with ASD and 38 age-matched children exhibiting typical development. Systematic bioinformatic analysis revealed that the composition of gut microbiota differed between ASD and typically developing children (TDC). Moreover, the total amounts of short-chain fatty acids, metabolites produced by bacteria, were increased in ASD children. At the phylum level, we found a significant decrease in the relative Bacteroidetes abundance of the ASD group, whereas Actinobacteria abundance was significantly increased. Furthermore, we found significantly lower Bacteroides levels and higher Bifidobacterium levels in the ASD group than in the TDC group at the genus level. Functional analysis of the microbiota in ASD children predicted that several pathways, including genetic information processing and amino acid metabolism, can be associated with ASD pathogenesis. Although more research is needed to determine whether the differences between ASD and TDC are actually related to ASD pathogenesis, these results provide further evidence of altered gut microbiota in children with ASD, possibly providing new perspectives on the diagnosis and therapeutic approaches for ASD patients.
34683111|a|Resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging provides dynamic insight into the functional organization of the brains' intrinsic activity at rest. The emergence of resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging in both the clinical and research settings may be attributed to recent advancements in statistical techniques, non-invasiveness and enhanced spatiotemporal resolution compared to other neuroimaging modalities, and the capability to identify and characterize deep brain structures and networks. In this report we describe a 16-year-old female patient with autism spectrum disorder who underwent resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging due to late regression. Imaging revealed deactivated networks in deep brain structures involved in monoamine synthesis. Monoamine neurotransmitter deficits were confirmed by cerebrospinal fluid analysis. This case suggests that resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging may have clinical utility as a non-invasive biomarker of central nervous system neurochemical alterations by measuring the function of neurotransmitter-driven networks. Use of this technology can accelerate and increase the accuracy of selecting appropriate therapeutic agents for patients with neurological and neurodevelopmental disorders.
34683092|a|A retrospective analysis of administrative claims containing a diverse mixture of ages, ethnicities, and geographical regions across the United States was conducted in order to identify medical events that occur during pregnancy and are associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The dataset used in this study is comprised of 123,824 pregnancies of which 1265 resulted in the child being diagnosed with ASD during the first five years of life. Logistic regression analysis revealed significant relationships between several maternal medical claims, made during her pregnancy and segmented by trimester, and the child's diagnosis of ASD. Having a biological sibling with ASD, maternal use of antidepressant medication and psychiatry services as well as non-pregnancy related claims such hospital visits, surgical procedures, and radiology exposure were related to an increased risk of ASD regardless of trimester. Urinary tract infections during the first trimester and preterm delivery during the second trimester were also related to an increased risk of ASD. Preventative and obstetrical care were associated with a decreased risk for ASD. A better understanding of the medical factors that increase the risk of having a child with ASD can lead to strategies to decrease risk or identify those children who require increased surveillance for the development of ASD to promote early diagnosis and intervention.
34682763|a|The central nervous system (CNS) is closely related to the gastrointestinal tract, mainly through regulating its function and homeostasis. Simultaneously, the gut flora affects the CNS and plays an essential role in the pathogenesis of neurologic and neuropsychological disorders such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or autism spectrum disorder. The population of gut microorganisms contains more than one billion bacteria. The most common are six phyla: Proteobacteria, Actinomyces, Verucomicrobia, Fusobacteria, and dominant Bacteroides with Firmicutes. The microbiota-gut-brain axis is a bidirectional nervous, endocrine, and immune communication between these two organs. They are connected through a variety of pathways, including the vagus nerve, the immune system, microbial metabolites such as short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), the enteric nervous system, and hormones. Age, diet, antibiotics influence the balance of gut microorganisms and probably lead to the development of neurodegenerative disorders. In this article, a review is presented and discussed, with a specific focus on the changes of gut microbiota, gut-brain axis, related disorders, and the factors that influence gut imbalance.
34682738|a|Background: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) diagnoses have rapidly increased globally. Both environmental and genetic factors appear to contribute to the development of ASD. Several studies have shown a potential association between prenatal or postnatal pesticide exposure and the risk of developing ASD. Methods: We reviewed the available literature concerning the relationship between early life exposure to pesticides used in agriculture, such as organochlorines, organophosphates and pyrethroids, and ASD onset in childhood. We searched on Medline and Scopus for cohort or case-control studies published in English from 1977 to 2020. Results: A total of seven articles were selected for the review. We found a remarkable association between the maternal exposure to pyrethroid, as well as the exposure to organophosphate during pregnancy or in the first years of childhood, and the risk of ASD onset. This association was found to be less evident with organochlorine pesticides. Pregnancy seems to be the time when pesticide exposure appears to have the greatest impact on the onset of ASD in children. Conclusions: Among the different environmental pollutants, pesticides should be considered as emerging risk factors for ASD. The potential association identified between the exposure to pesticides and ASD needs to be implemented and confirmed by further epidemiological studies based on individual assessment both in outdoor and indoor conditions, including multiple confounding factors, and using statistical models that take into account single and multiple pesticide residues.
34682634|a|We provide a conceptual model on the complex interaction between stress, psychological predisposition, and personality traits, accounting for gender, in parents of children with and without autism. We performed a path analysis using a structural equation modeling approach in a sample of parents including 60 ASD and 53 TD couples. In parents of typically developing children (TD), depression level and age are the main direct predictors of stress through the mediating effect of anxiety. Otherwise, in the ASD parent group, the personality trait 'openness' directly predicts the defensive response and stress levels without the mediating effect of anxiety. Our data suggest a route of action in promoting new behavioral strategies to prevent parenting stress, making families run smoothly.
34682430|a|Background: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) may coexist with Down syndrome (DS). Most studies on this topic involve school-age children, adolescents, or adults with DS. This study looked at ASD symptoms, other mental health problems, and challenging behaviors in toddlers with DS at low risk of ASD. Methods: We used screening tools for autism in toddlers; BISCUIT-Parts 1-3 and Q-CHAT. We compared four groups of children aged 17-37 months: DS, ASD, Atypical Development (AD), and Typically Developing (TD). Results: Children with DS showed lower symptoms of ASD than children with ASD (without DS) and higher than TD children, except for repetitive behaviors/restricted interests. For comorbid mental health problems and difficult behaviors, children with DS scored lower than children with ASD. There were no differences between children with DS and TD children in this regard. Conclusions: The study results indicate that BISCUIT-Parts 1-3 are valid instruments to differentiate toddlers with DS from toddlers with ASD. However, they also show that toddlers with DS at low ASD risk are a very heterogeneous group when the ASD symptoms are considered. Autistic characteristics should be taken into account in supporting young children with this genetic condition.
34682429|a|Emotional dysregulation problems seem to affect more than 80% of people with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and may include irritability, aggressive behaviors, self-injury, and anxiety. Even though these types of problems are very common and affect the well-being of individuals with ASD, there are no objective assessment tools developed for this population and there are only a few intervention techniques meant to address these symptoms. This study investigates the feasibility of using off-the-shelf wearable devices to accurately measure heart rate, which has been associated with emotional dysregulation, and to test the effectiveness of functional communication training in reducing the emotional outburst in preschoolers with ASD. We used a single-case experiment design with three preschoolers with ASD to test if the duration of the emotional outburst and the elevated heart rate levels can be reduced by using functional communication training. Our results show that for two of the participants, the intervention was effective in reducing the duration of behaviors associated with emotional outburst, and that there were significant differences between baseline and intervention phase in terms of heart rate levels. However, our results are inconclusive regarding the association between elevated heart rates and the occurrence of the emotional outburst. Nevertheless, more research is needed to investigate the use of off-the-shelf wearable devices in predicting challenging behaviors in children with ASD.
34682104|a|This study investigated the relationship between exposure to general anesthesia (GA) and the risk of cognitive and mental disorders. This study has thus investigated the relationships between exposure to GA before the age of 3 and subsequent cognitive and mental disorders in a national-wide research sample. We obtained our subjects from the National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD) of Taiwan, which was based on the International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM). Children in the hospital aged less than 3 years old were included if there was GA exposure or not during the period of year 1997 to 2008. Cox proportional hazard regression models adjusted for potential confounding factors were used to estimate the relative magnitude of the risk associated with GA exposure. The cohort contained 2261 subjects with GA and 4522 children without GA as a comparison group. GA exposure group had a higher rate of developmental delay than in the without GA group (hazard ratio 1.46, p < 0.0001). There was no significant difference in the overall incidence of ADHD, autism and intellectual disability between the GA-exposed group and the comparison cohort. In conclusion, this study reported that children exposed to GA early before the age of three had a small association with increased risk of development delay thereafter.
34681816|a|Paracetamol is commonly used to treat fever and pain in pregnant women, but there are growing concerns that this may cause attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorder in the offspring. A growing number of epidemiological studies suggests that relative risks for these disorders increase by an average of about 25% following intrauterine paracetamol exposure. The data analyzed point to a dose-effect relationship but cannot fully account for unmeasured confounders, notably indication and genetic transmission. Only few experimental investigations have addressed this issue. Altered behavior has been demonstrated in offspring of paracetamol-gavaged pregnant rats, and paracetamol given at or prior to day 10 of life to newborn mice resulted in altered locomotor activity in response to a novel home environment in adulthood and blunted the analgesic effect of paracetamol given to adult animals. The molecular mechanisms that might mediate these effects are unknown. Paracetamol has diverse pharmacologic actions. It reduces prostaglandin formation via competitive inhibition of the peroxidase moiety of prostaglandin H2 synthase, while its metabolite N-arachidonoyl-phenolamine activates transient vanilloid-subtype 1 receptors and interferes with cannabinoid receptor signaling. The metabolite N-acetyl-p-benzo-quinone-imine, which is pivotal for liver damage after overdosing, exerts oxidative stress and depletes glutathione in the brain already at dosages below the hepatic toxicity threshold. Given the widespread use of paracetamol during pregnancy and the lack of safe alternatives, its impact on the developing brain deserves further investigation.
34681028|a|The maternal environment during the periconceptional period influences foetal growth and development, in part, via epigenetic mechanisms moderated by one-carbon metabolic pathways. During embryonic development, one-carbon metabolism is involved in brain development and neural programming. Derangements in one-carbon metabolism increase (i) the short-term risk of embryonic neural tube-related defects and (ii) long-term childhood behaviour, cognition, and autism spectrum disorders. Here we investigate the association between maternal one-carbon metabolism and foetal and neonatal brain growth and development. Database searching resulted in 26 articles eligible for inclusion. Maternal vitamin B6, vitamin B12, homocysteine, and choline were not associated with foetal and/or neonatal head growth. First-trimester maternal plasma folate within the normal range (>17 nmol/L) associated with increased foetal head size and head growth, and high erythrocyte folate (1538-1813 nmol/L) with increased cerebellar growth, whereas folate deficiency (<7 nmol/L) associated with a reduced foetal brain volume. Preconceptional folic acid supplement use and specific dietary patterns (associated with increased B vitamins and low homocysteine) increased foetal head size. Although early pregnancy maternal folate appears to be the most independent predictor of foetal brain growth, there is insufficient data to confirm the link between maternal folate and offspring risks for neurodevelopmental diseases.
34680999|a|Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are a group of complex neurodevelopmental disorders, characterized by a deficit in social interaction and communication. Many genetic variants are associated with ASD, including duplication of 7q11.23 encompassing 26-28 genes. Symmetrically, the hemizygous deletion of 7q11.23 causes Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS), a multisystem disorder characterized by "hyper-sociability" and communication skills. Interestingly, deletion of four non-exonic mobile elements (MEs) in the "canine WBS locus" were associated with the behavioral divergence between the wolf and the dog and dog sociability and domestication. We hypothesized that indel of these MEs could be involved in ASD, associated with its different phenotypes and useful as biomarkers for patient stratification and therapeutic design. Since these MEs are non-exonic they have never been discovered before. We searched the corresponding MEs and loci in humans by comparative genomics. Interestingly, they mapped on different but ASD related genes. The loci in individuals with phenotypically different autism and neurotypical controls were amplified by PCR. A sub-set of each amplicon was sequenced by Sanger. No variant resulted associated with ASD and neither specific phenotypes were found but novel small-scale insertions and SNPs were discovered. Since MEs are hyper-methylated and epigenetically modulate gene expression, further investigation in ASD is necessary.
34680901|a|Molecular mechanisms underlying neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases are insufficiently elucidated. A detailed understanding of these mechanisms may help to further improve medical intervention. Recently, intellectual abilities, creativity, and amnesia have been associated with neuroplastin, a cell recognition glycoprotein of the immunoglobulin superfamily that participates in synapse formation and function and calcium signaling. Data from animal models suggest a role for neuroplastin in pathways affected in neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases. Neuroplastin loss or disruption of molecular pathways related to neuronal processes has been linked to various neurological diseases, including dementia, schizophrenia, and Alzheimer's disease. Here, we review the molecular features of the cell recognition molecule neuroplastin, and its binding partners, which are related to neurological processes and involved in learning and memory. The emerging functions of neuroplastin may have implications for the treatment of diseases, particularly those of the nervous system.
34679621|a|The new 'normal' defined during the COVID-19 pandemic has forced us to re-assess how people with special needs thrive in these unprecedented conditions, such as those with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). These changing/challenging conditions have instigated us to revisit the usage of telehealth services to improve the quality of life for people with ASD. This study aims to identify mobile applications that suit the needs of such individuals. This work focuses on identifying features of a number of highly-rated mobile applications (apps) that are designed to assist people with ASD, specifically those features that use Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies. In this study, 250 mobile apps have been retrieved using keywords such as autism, autism AI, and autistic. Among 250 apps, 46 were identified after filtering out irrelevant apps based on defined elimination criteria such as ASD common users, medical staff, and non-medically trained people interacting with people with ASD. In order to review common functionalities and features, 25 apps were downloaded and analysed based on eye tracking, facial expression analysis, use of 3D cartoons, haptic feedback, engaging interface, text-to-speech, use of Applied Behaviour Analysis therapy, Augmentative and Alternative Communication techniques, among others were also deconstructed. As a result, software developers and healthcare professionals can consider the identified features in designing future support tools for autistic people. This study hypothesises that by studying these current features, further recommendations of how existing applications for ASD people could be enhanced using AI for (1) progress tracking, (2) personalised content delivery, (3) automated reasoning, (4) image recognition, and (5) Natural Language Processing (NLP). This paper follows the PRISMA methodology, which involves a set of recommendations for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses.
34679345|a|BACKGROUND: Autism Spectrum Disorder is often associated with deficits in executive functions (EFs), which is contributing significantly to individuals with ASD's difficulties in conducting an independent life, particularly considering social skills. Technologies offer promising opportunities to structure EF intervention programs for children on the autistic spectrum. METHODS: This study aimed to review the effectiveness of randomized controlled trials or quasi-experimental studies of EF interventions delivered to children and young people (up to 23 years old) with a diagnosis of ASD. A special focus was dedicated to document the effectiveness of computerized and non-computerized cognitive training on (1) EFs and on (2) ASD symptomatology and social skills. Of 2601 studies retrieved, 19 fulfilled the inclusion criteria. RESULTS: Most of the interventions identified were effective in enhancing EFs and reducing symptoms in children and young people with ASD. Limited evidence is available on their generalization to untrained skills (i.e., social abilities) as well as long-term effects. CONCLUSIONS: There is growing evidence for overall effectiveness of EF training, particularly when computerized. However, caution should be taken when interpreting these findings owing to methodological limitations, the minimal number of papers retrieved, and a small samples of included studies.
34679343|a|There is a growing body of evidence to suggest that individuals with Down syndrome (DS) are diagnosed with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) at a higher rate than individuals in the general population. Nonetheless, little is known regarding the unique presentation of ASD symptoms in DS. The current study aims to explore the prevalence and profiles of ASD symptoms in a sample of individuals with DS (n = 83), aged between 6 and 23 years. Analysis of this sample (MAge = 15.13) revealed that approximately 37% of the sample met the classification cut-off for ASD using the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule 2 (ADOS-2) Calibrated Severity Score (CSS), an indicator of the participants' severity of ASD-related symptoms. Item-level analyses revealed that multiple items on Module 2 and Module 3 of the ADOS-2, mostly in the Social Affect (SA) subdomain, differentiated the children with DS who did not meet ASD classification (DS-only) from those who did (DS + ASD). Lastly, comparisons of individuals with DS-only and those with DS + ASD differed significantly on the syntactic complexity of their expressive language. These findings shed light on the unique presentation of ASD symptoms in a sample of individuals with DS and suggest that expressive language abilities may play a pivotal role in the presentation of ASD symptoms in DS.
34679334|a|Scientific research on neuro-cognitive mechanisms of autism often focuses on circuits that support social functioning. However, autism is a heterogeneous developmental variation in multiple domains, including social communication, but also language, cognition, and sensory-motor control. This suggests that the underlying mechanisms of autism share a domain-general foundation that impacts all of these processes. In this Perspective Review, we propose that autism is not a social deficit that results from an atypical "social brain". Instead, typical social development relies on learning. In social animals, infants depend on their caregivers for survival, which makes social information vitally salient. The infant must learn to socially interact in order to survive and develop, and the most prominent learning in early life is crafted by social interactions. Therefore, the most prominent outcome of a learning variation is atypical social development. To support the hypothesis that autism results from a variation in learning, we first review evidence from neuroscience and developmental science, demonstrating that typical social development depends on two domain-general processes that determine learning: (a) motivation, guided by allostatic regulation of the internal milieu; and (b) multi-modal associations, determined by the statistical regularities of the external milieu. These two processes are basic ingredients of typical development because they determine allostasis-driven learning of the social environment. We then review evidence showing that allostasis and learning are affected among individuals with autism, both neurally and behaviorally. We conclude by proposing a novel domain-general framework that emphasizes allostasis-driven learning as a key process underlying autism. Guided by allostasis, humans learn to become social, therefore, the atypical social profile seen in autism can reflect a domain-general variation in allostasis-driven learning. This domain-general view raises novel research questions in both basic and clinical research and points to targets for clinical intervention that can lower the age of diagnosis and improve the well-being of individuals with autism.
34677837|a|
34677755|a|Parents of children with ASD (N = 86; mean age 44.8 months; 67 boys) were randomized to either WHO Caregiver Skills Training (CST) delivered in public health settings in Italy or enhanced treatment-as-usual. Primary blinded outcomes were 3-months post-intervention change scores of autism severity and engagement during caregiver-child interaction. CST was highly acceptable to caregivers and feasibly delivered by trained local clinicians. Intention-to-treat analysis showed a large and significant effect on parent skills supporting joint engagement and a smaller significant effect on flow of interaction. Expected changes in child autism severity and joint engagement did not meet statistical significance. Analysis of secondary outcomes showed a significant effect on parenting stress, self-efficacy, and child gestures. Strategies to improve the effectiveness of CST are discussed.
34677754|a|Many students with autism have difficulties engaging with their classroom environments and forming friendships, which are mostly affected by deficits in social, communication, and motor skills. The Special Education Elementary Longitudinal Study (SEELS, 2000) data set was used, focusing on elementary age students with autism, to explore the longitudinal relationships between social, communication, and motor skills and the mediating role of motor skills in between communication and social skills by using structural equational modeling analyses. Results show that (a) motor skills mediate the relationship between communication and social skills in elementary school, (b) there are significant longitudinal relationships among these skills in elementary school. Increased motor skills may improve social skills for students with autism in elementary school.
34677753|a|Intelligence (IQ) scores are used in educational and vocational planning for individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) yet little is known about the stability of IQ throughout development. We examined longitudinal age-related IQ stability in 119 individuals with ASD (3-36 years of age at first visit) and 128 typically developing controls. Intelligence measures were collected over a 20-year period. In ASD, Full Scale (FSIQ) and Verbal (VIQ) Intelligence started lower in childhood and increased at a greater rate with age relative to the control group. By early adulthood, VIQ and working memory stabilized, whereas nonverbal and perceptual scores continued to change. Our results suggest that in individuals with ASD, IQ estimates may be dynamic in childhood and young adulthood.
34676948|a|BACKGROUND: There is growing understanding of the potential benefits of a multi-method approach to accurately capture language skills of children on the autism spectrum. Tools such as Language ENvironment Analysis (LENA) provide an efficient means of capturing and analysing early child vocalizations (CVs) and the language learning environment. While developed to capture whole-day recordings of child language in naturalistic settings, there is potential utility in capturing, but little knowledge about, primary LENA metrics-including CVs and conversational turns (CTs)-and novel metrics, such as vocalization ratios (VRs), sampled in clinical practice settings where children are often seen. Moreover, recent research indicates that the novel VR may offer a broad indicator of children's developmental level, beyond just their language abilities, a hypothesis yet to be investigated in a large sample of children for whom the LENA was designed (i.e., pre-schoolers). AIMS: To explore the extent to which primary and novel LENA metrics collected during brief one-to-one clinical interaction was a useful indicator of developmental outcomes for children on the autism spectrum. METHODS & PROCEDURES: Participants were recruited as part of an on-going research programme evaluating early intervention outcomes (n = 99; age 14-47 months). Language samples were collected at intake (T1) using the wearable LENA Digital Language Processors during a one-to-one, play-based assessment with a clinician. Direct (Mullen Scales of Early Learning-MSEL) and parent-report (Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales-VABS) measures of verbal and non-verbal skills were also collected at intake (T1) and again at exit (T2), approximately 12 months later. OUTCOMES & RESULTS: Few correlations were observed between child measures and CVs, a primary LENA metric. The novel VR metric was associated with concurrent direct assessment (MSEL) (and to a lesser extent parent report; VABS) measures of verbal and non-verbal skills, with moderate positive correlations found between VRs and all directly assessed subscale scores. However, VRs did not uniquely contribute to the prediction of child outcomes when baseline skills were also considered. CONCLUSIONS & IMPLICATIONS: The novel VR may provide an insight into autistic children's overall development in addition to their language ability, suggesting that even when collected in a short recording format, LENA might be a useful component of a multi-method assessment approach. WHAT THIS PAPER ADDS: What is already known on the subject To accurately capture language skills of children on the autism spectrum, multi-method approaches, including natural language sampling, are recommended. Tools such as LENA provide an efficient means of capturing and analysing naturalistic child language and the language learning environment. What this paper adds to existing knowledge This study demonstrates the potential benefits, and limitations, of using LENA to augment assessment of young children on the autism spectrum. Specifically, LENA provides a complementary, and low burden, method for capturing child language samples. What are the potential or actual clinical implications of this work? Novel metrics, such as the VR, collected during brief clinical interactions might be a useful component of a multi-method assessment approach for children on the autism spectrum.
34676485|a|Little is known about the academic and extra-curricular experiences of academically talented students with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). This study focused on how these capable students with ASD successfully navigated and completed high school, and specifically, the experiences that enabled them to attend competitive colleges. Using comparative case studies and directed content analysis, data were derived from semi-structured interviews with 40 students who had been identified as academically talented with ASD, and were enrolled in, or recently graduated from, highly competitive colleges in the United States. The majority were identified as having academic talents, participated in challenging honors classes, enrichment opportunities, interest-based extra-curricular activities, residential summer programs, and pursued other advanced educational experiences. Implications for educational and talent development services are included.
34676352|a|
34676348|a|In 2017, a National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) report comprehensively evaluated the body of evidence regarding cannabis health effects through the year 2016. The objectives of this study are to identify and map the most recently (2016-2019) published literature across approved conditions for medical cannabis and to evaluate the quality of identified recent systematic reviews, published following the NASEM report. Following the literature search from 5 databases and consultation with experts, 11 conditions were identified for evidence compilation and evaluation: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, autism, cancer, chronic noncancer pain, Crohn's disease, epilepsy, glaucoma, human immunodeficiency virus/AIDS, multiple sclerosis (MS), Parkinson's disease, and posttraumatic stress disorder. A total of 198 studies were included after screening for condition-specific relevance and after imposing the following exclusion criteria: preclinical focus, non-English language, abstracts only, editorials/commentary, case studies/series, and non-U.S. study setting. Data extracted from studies included: study design type, outcome definition, intervention definition, sample size, study setting, and reported effect size. Few completed randomized controlled trials (RCTs) were identified. Studies classified as systematic reviews were graded using the Assessing the Methodological Quality of Systematic Reviews-2 tool to evaluate the quality of evidence. Few high-quality systematic reviews were available for most conditions, with the exceptions of MS (9 of 9 graded moderate/high quality; evidence for 2/9 indicating cannabis improved outcomes; evidence for 7/9 indicating cannabis inconclusive), epilepsy (3 of 4 graded moderate/high quality; 3 indicating cannabis improved outcomes; 1 indicating cannabis inconclusive), and chronic noncancer pain (12 of 13 graded moderate/high quality; evidence for 7/13 indicating cannabis improved outcomes; evidence from 6/7 indicating cannabis inconclusive). Among RCTs, we identified few studies of substantial rigor and quality to contribute to the evidence base. However, there are some conditions for which significant evidence suggests that select dosage forms and routes of administration likely have favorable risk-benefit ratios (i.e., epilepsy and chronic noncancer pain). The body of evidence for medical cannabis requires more rigorous evaluation before consideration as a treatment option for many conditions, and evidence necessary to inform policy and treatment guidelines is currently insufficient for many conditions.
34676305|a|Background: There are no data on the precise burden of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD) in Africa, despite high incidence of risk factors. Ten Questions Questionnaire (TQQ) has been used extensively in Africa to screen neurological impairments but not autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorders (ADHD). The Neurodevelopmental Screening Tool (NDST) has reliably assessed NDD in Asia; its validity in Africa is unknown. Methods: Using NDST and TQQ, we screened 11,223 children aged 6-9 years in Kilifi, Kenya. We invited all screen-positives and a proportion of screen-negative children for confirmatory diagnosis of NDD using clinical history, neuropsychological assessments and interviews. Results: In total, 2,245 (20%) children screened positive for NDD. Confirmatory testing was completed for 1,564 (69.7%) screen-positive and 598 (6.7%) screen-negative children. NDST's sensitivity was 87.8% (95%CI: 88.3-88.5%) for any NDD, 96.5% (95%CI:96.1-96.8%) ASD and 89.2% (95%CI: 88.7-89.8%) for ADHD. Moderate/severe neurological impairments' sensitivities ranged from 85.7% (95%CI: 85.1-86.3%) for hearing impairments to 100.00% (100.0-100.0%) for motor impairments. NDST had higher sensitivities than TQQ for epilepsy (88.8 vs 86.7), motor impairments (100.0 vs 93.7) and cognitive impairment (88.2 vs 84.3). Sensitivities for visual and hearing impairments were comparable in both tools. NDST specificity was 82.8% (95%CI: 82.1-83.5%) for any NDD, 94.5% (95%CI: 94.0-94.9%) for ASD and 81.7% (95%CI: 81.0-82.4%) for ADHD. The specificities range for neurological impairments was 80.0% (95%CI: 79.3-80.7%) for visual impairments to 93.8% (95%CI: 93.4-94.3%) for epilepsy. Negative predictive values were generally very high (<=100%), but most positive predictive values (PPV) were low (<=17.8%). Domain specific internal consistency ranged from 0.72 (95%CI: 0.70-0.74) for ADHD to 0.89 (95%CI: 0.87-0.90) for epilepsy. Conclusions: NDST possesses high sensitivity and specificity for detecting different domains of NDD in Kilifi. Low PPV suggest that positive diagnoses should be confirmed when samples are drawn from a population with low disease prevalence.
34676183|a|The goal of this investigation was to determine whether there are alterations in DNA methylation patterns in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Material and Methods: Controlled prospective observational case-control study. Within the ASD group, children were sub-classified based on the presence (AMR subgroup) or absence (ANMR subgroup) of neurodevelopmental regression during the first 2 years of life. We analyzed the global levels of DNA methylation, reflected in LINE-1, and the local DNA methylation pattern in two candidate genes, Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule (NCAM1) and Nerve Growth Factor (NGF) that, according to our previous studies, might be associated to an increased risk for ASD. For this purpose, we utilized blood samples from pediatric patients with ASD (n = 53) and their corresponding controls (n = 45). Results: We observed a slight decrease in methylation levels of LINE-1 in the ASD group, compared to the control group. One of the CpG in LINE-1 (GenBank accession no.X58075, nucleotide position 329) was the main responsible for such reduction, highly significant in the ASD subgroup of children with AMR (p < 0.05). Furthermore, we detected higher NCAM1 methylation levels in ASD children, compared to healthy children (p < 0.001). The data, moreover, showed higher NGF methylation levels in the AMR subgroup, compared to the control group and the ANMR subgroup. These results are consistent with our prior study, in which lower plasma levels of NCAM1 and higher levels of NGF were found in the ANMR subgroup, compared to the subgroup that comprised neurotypically developing children. Conclusions: We have provided new clues about the epigenetic changes that occur in ASD, and suggest two potential epigenetic biomarkers that would facilitate the diagnosis of the disorder. We similarly present with evidence of a clear differentiation in DNA methylation between the ASD subgroups, with or without mental regression.
34675929|a|Intrauterine inflammation impacts prenatal neurodevelopment and is linked to adverse neurobehavioral outcomes ranging from cerebral palsy to autism spectrum disorder. However, the mechanism by which a prenatal exposure to intrauterine inflammation contributes to life-long neurobehavioral consequences is unknown. To address this gap in knowledge, this study investigates how inflammation transverses across multiple anatomic compartments from the maternal reproductive tract to the fetal brain and what specific cell types in the fetal brain may cause long-term neuronal injury. Utilizing a well-established mouse model, we found that mid-gestation intrauterine inflammation resulted in a lasting neutrophil influx to the decidua in the absence of maternal systemic inflammation. Fetal immunologic changes were observed at 72-hours post-intrauterine inflammation, including elevated neutrophils and macrophages in the fetal liver, and increased granulocytes and activated microglia in the fetal brain. Through unbiased clustering, a population of Gr-1+ gamma/delta T cells was identified as the earliest immune cell shift in the fetal brain of fetuses exposed to intrauterine inflammation and determined to be producing high levels of IFNgamma when compared to gamma/delta T cells in other compartments. In a case-control study of term infants, IFNgamma was found to be elevated in the cord blood of term infants exposed to intrauterine inflammation compared to those without this exposure. Collectively, these data identify a novel cellular immune mechanism for fetal brain injury in the setting of intrauterine inflammation.
34675825|a|Background: This study aimed to explore the main effects of environmental risk factors as well as their interaction effects with miRNA on the risk of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Methods: One hundred fifty-nine ASD children (ASD group) and 159 healthy children (control group), aged 2-6 years, were included in this study. ASD diagnoses were based on DSM-5 criteria. The extensive medical and demographic characterization of the two groups were recorded. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) in serum were detected by qRT-PCR. Results: Compared with the control group, the ASD group had significantly higher rates of maternal stress during pregnancy (p < 0.001), maternal drinking during pregnancy (p = 0.006), threatened abortion (p = 0.011), pregnancy-induced hypertension (p = 0.032), gestational diabetes (p = 0.039), maternal anemia during pregnancy (p < 0.001), umbilical cord knot (p < 0.001), neonatal jaundice (p < 0.001), family psychiatric history (p = 0.001), and much lower birth weight (p = 0.012). Furthermore, the ASD group had much lower expression levels of hsa-miR-181b-5p (p < 0.001) and hsa-miR-320a (p < 0.001) and significantly higher levels of hsa-miR-19b-3p (p < 0.001). The interactions of hsa-miR-320a and maternal stress during pregnancy (OR = 39.42, p < 0.001), hsa-miR-19b-3p and neonatal jaundice (OR = 2.44, p < 0.001), and hsa-miR-181b-5p and family psychiatric history (OR = 8.65, p = 0.001) could increase ASD risk. Conclusions: The dysregulation of hsa-miR-181b-5p, hsa-miR-320a, and hsa-miR-19b-3p could interact with environmental factors, such as maternal stress during pregnancy, neonatal jaundice, and family psychiatric history, to impact the risk of ASD.
34675402|a|Manipulation of the gut microbiome offers a promising treatment option for children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) for whom functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGIDs) are a common comorbidity. Both ASD and FGIDs have been linked to dysfunction of the microbiome-gut-brain (MGB) axis. Dysfunction of this bidirectional network has the ability to impact multiple host processes including gastrointestinal (GI) function, mood and behaviour. Prebiotic and probiotic supplementation aims to produce beneficial shifts within the gut environment, resulting in favourable changes to microbial metabolite production and gastrointestinal function. The aim of this review is to investigate the gut microbiome as a therapeutic target for children with ASD. Evidence for the utility of prebiotics, probiotics or synbiotics (i.e., prebiotic + probiotic) among this cohort is examined. Electronic databases (PubMed, Web of Science, Medline and clinicaltrials.gov) were searched using keywords or phrases to review the literature from 1 January 2010 to 30 October 2020. Findings suggest limited, but preliminary evidence of efficacy in relieving GI distress, improving ASD-associated behaviours, altering microbiota composition, and reducing inflammatory potential.
34675342|a|Mate preference in short-term relationships and long-term ones may depend on many physical, psychological, and socio-cultural factors. In this study, 178 students (81 females) in sports and 153 engineering students (64 females) answered the systemizing quotient (SQ) and empathizing quotient (EQ) questionnaires and had their digit ratio measured. They rated their preferred mate on 12 black-line drawing body figures varying in body mass index (BMI) and waist to hip ratio (WHR) for short-term and long-term relationships. Men relative to women preferred lower WHR and BMI for mate selection for both short-term and long-term relationships. BMI and WHR preference in men is independent of each other, but has a negative correlation in women. For men, digit ratio was inversely associated with BMI (p = 0.039, B = - 0.154) preference in a short-term relationship, and EQ was inversely associated with WHR preference in a long-term relationship (p = 0.045, B = - 0.164). Furthermore, men and women in sports, compared to engineering students, preferred higher (p = 0.009, B = 0.201) and lower BMI (p = 0.034, B = - 0.182) for short-term relationships, respectively. Women were more consistent in their preferences for short-term and long-term relationships relative to men. Both biological factors and social/experiential factors contribute to mate preferences in men while in women, mostly social/experiential factors contribute to them.
34674737|a|BACKGROUND: Prior evidence points towards lower cardiac vagal modulation in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) as compared to control groups. A cross-sectional phase in this study will gather more evidence concerning this topic. A longitudinal phase will explore the efficacy of a biofeedback intervention based on respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) in adolescents with ASD. Finally, a feasibility study will focus on a non-supervised RSA biofeedback intervention in this population. METHODS: The cross-sectional phase includes the comparison of adolescents with ASD (n=38) and age- and gender-matched typically developing peers. A standardized assessment will be used which contains physiological, cortisol, and behavioral measurements. The longitudinal phase contains a randomized, single-blinded, and sham-controlled design to determine the efficacy of supervised RSA biofeedback in adolescents with ASD (n=128). A follow-up phase of 5 weeks is included to evaluate the presence of retention effects. During the latter, a feasibility study will focus on a non-supervised intervention (n=64). Assessments as described previously are scheduled after the intervention and the follow-up phase. DISCUSSION: First, more conclusive evidence will be provided for the presence of lower cardiac vagal modulation in adolescents with ASD as well as the association between these lower values and physiological and behavioral indices. Second, the supervised intervention in adolescents with ASD is hypothesized to upregulate this cardiac vagal modulation and positively change behavioral and physiological parameters. Third, evidence regarding the feasibility and acceptability of a non-supervised intervention may open novel avenues for home-based interventions in this population. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04628715 . Registered on 13 November 2020.
34674564|a|LAY ABSTRACT: Using oral history methods, we interviewed and recorded 26 autistic adults in Australia about their life history. We wanted to better understand interviewees' self-reflections about their lives. The interviewers were autistic researchers and the interviews were analysed by autistic and non-autistic researchers. All of the adults we interviewed were born before 1975 and formally identified as autistic after age 35 years. This group of people is sometimes referred to as 'late-diagnosed autistic adults'. In general, there is not much research done about autistic adults and even less is known about those diagnosed late in life. In this article, we explore what these adults said about their sense of self and how that changed over time. These autistic adults told us about many negative experiences, including trauma, which had shaped how they think about themselves. For most, autism diagnosis had a very positive impact on their sense of self, allowing them to understand more about their own past and to feel good about their autistic identity. Previously some researchers have said that autistic people have a limited or impaired sense of self. Instead, our results show some autistic people can actually reflect deeply on their lives and their changing sense of self-identity over time.
34674562|a|The purpose of this letter to the editors is to highlight to the readership of Autism the recommended use of the Autism Quality of Life measure for research with autistic adults. The Autism Quality of Life was developed for use alongside the WHOQoL-BREF and WHO Disabilities module. The letter raises some concerns about the use of the Autism Quality of Life as a stand-alone measure in a recent study by Caron et al. published in Autism.
34674246|a|Event-related potentials (ERPs) are an ideal tool for measuring neural responses in a wide range of participants, including children diagnosed with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). However, due to perceived barriers regarding participant compliance, much of this work has excluded children with low IQ and/or reduced adaptive functioning, significant anxiety symptoms, and/or sensory processing difficulties, including heterogeneous samples of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and children with fragile X syndrome (FXS). We have developed a behavioral support protocol designed to obtain high-quality ERP data from children in a single session. Using this approach, ERP data were successfully collected from participants with ASD, FXS, and typical development (TD). Higher success rates were observed for children with ASD and TD than children with FXS. Unique clinical-behavioral characteristics were associated with successful data collection across these groups. Higher chronological age, nonverbal mental age, and receptive language skills were associated with a greater number of valid trials completed in children with ASD. In contrast, higher language ability, lower autism severity, increased anxiety, and increased sensory hyperresponsivity were associated with a greater number of valid trials completed in children with FXS. This work indicates that a "one-size-fits-all" approach cannot be taken to ERP research on children with NDDs, but that a single-session paradigm is feasible and is intended to promote increased representation of children with NDDs in neuroscience research through development of ERP methods that support inclusion of diverse and representative samples.
34673770|a|BACKGROUND: A knowledge gap exists about the risk of cancer in individuals with intellectual disability (ID). The primary aim of this study was to estimate the cancer risk among individuals with ID compared to individuals without ID. METHODS AND FINDINGS: We conducted a population-based cohort study of all children live-born in Sweden between 1974 and 2013 and whose mothers were born in a Nordic country. All individuals were followed from birth until cancer diagnosis, emigration, death, or 31 December 2016 (up to age 43 years), whichever came first. Incident cancers were identified from the Swedish Cancer Register. We fitted Cox regression models to calculate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) as measures of cancer risk in relation to ID after adjusting for several potential confounders. We analyzed ID by severity, as well as idiopathic ID and syndromic ID separately. We performed a sibling comparison to investigate familial confounding. The study cohort included a total of 3,531,305 individuals, including 27,956 (0.8%) individuals diagnosed with ID. Compared with the reference group (individuals without ID and without a full sibling with ID), individuals with ID were in general more likely to be male. The median follow-up time was 8.9 and 23.0 years for individuals with ID and individuals without ID, respectively. A total of 188 cancer cases were identified among individuals with ID (incidence rate [IR], 62 per 1,000 person-years), and 24,960 among individuals in the reference group (IR, 31 per 1,000 person-years). A statistically significantly increased risk was observed for any cancer (HR 1.57, 95% CI 1.35-1.82; P < 0.001), as well as for several cancer types, including cancers of the esophagus (HR 28.4, 95% CI 6.2-130.6; P < 0.001), stomach (HR 6.1, 95% CI 1.5-24.9; P = 0.013), small intestine (HR 12.0, 95% CI 2.9-50.1; P < 0.001), colon (HR 2.0, 95% CI 1.0-4.1; P = 0.045), pancreas (HR 6.0, 95% CI 1.5-24.8; P = 0.013), uterus (HR 11.7, 95% CI 1.5-90.7; P = 0.019), kidney (HR 4.4, 95% CI 2.0-9.8; P < 0.001), central nervous system (HR 2.7, 95% CI 2.0-3.7; P < 0.001), and other or unspecified sites (HR 4.8, 95% CI 1.8-12.9; P = 0.002), as well as acute lymphoid leukemia (HR 2.4, 95% CI 1.3-4.4; P = 0.003) and acute myeloid leukemia (HR 3.0, 95% CI 1.4-6.4; P = 0.004). Cancer risk was not modified by ID severity or sex but was higher for syndromic ID. The sibling comparison showed little support for familial confounding. The main study limitations were the limited statistical power for the analyses of specific cancer types, and the potential for underestimation of the studied associations (e.g., due to potential underdetection or delayed diagnosis of cancer among individuals with ID). CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we found that individuals with ID showed an increased risk of any cancer, as well as of several specific cancer types. These findings suggest that extended surveillance and early intervention for cancer among individuals with ID are warranted.
34673468|a|BACKGROUND: Sibling perspectives on the experiences of families caring for an autistic child are often overlooked in autism research. While qualitative research on these lived experiences has grown, it continues to primarily focus on parent reports. AIMS: This study explored how having a sibling with autism impacts the non-autistic siblings within a family systems framework. The goal of the current study was to expand the literature by exploring the impacts of autism on the sibling subsystem as reported by the parents and the non-autistic siblings themselves. METHODS AND PROCEDURES: The researchers interviewed 15 non-autistic siblings (aged 7-17) and 15 parents of children with autism to understand the experience of growing up with a sibling with autism. Content analysis was used to develop the interview protocol and analyze responses. Parent and non-autistic sibling reports of both siblings' effects on each other's development are triangulated with existing research. RESULTS: Findings indicate novel emotional skill-building occurs in non-autistic siblings, as well as some unique risk factors for internalizing and externalizing problems if non-autistic siblings' needs become deprioritized. Family stress, external relationships, intrapersonal and social skill development, and other implications of this unique relationship are discussed.
34673206|a|The GABA receptors represent the main inhibitory system in the central nervous system that ensure synaptogenesis, neurogenesis, and the regulation of neuronal plasticity and learning. GABAA receptors are pentameric in structure and belong to the Cys-loop superfamily. The GABRB2 gene, located on chromosome 5q34, encodes the beta2 subunit that combines with the alpha and gamma subunits to form the major subtype of GABAA receptors, which account for 43% of all GABAA receptors in the mammalian brain. Each subunit probably consists of an extracellular N-terminal domain, four membrane-spanning segments, a large intracellular loop between TM3 and TM4, and an extracellular C-terminal domain. Alternative splicing of the RNA transcript of the GABRB2 gene gives rise at least to four long and short isoforms with dissimilar electrophysiological properties. Furthermore, GABRB2 is imprinted and subjected to epigenetic regulation and positive selection. It has been associated with schizophrenia first in Han Chinese, and subsequently validated in other populations. Gabrb2 knockout mice also exhibited schizophrenia-like behavior and neuroinflammation that were ameliorated by the antipsychotic drug risperidone. GABRB2 was also associated with other neuropsychiatric disorders including bipolar disorder, epilepsy, autism spectrum disorder, Alzheimer's disease, frontotemporal dementia, substance dependence, depression, internet gaming disorder, and premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Recently, it has been postulated that GABRB2 might be a potential marker for different cancer types. As GABRB2 has a pivotal role in the central nervous system and is increasingly recognized to contribute to human diseases, further understanding of its structure and function may expedite the generation of new therapeutic approaches.
34673045|a|Autistic individuals show enhanced perceptual functioning on many behavioral tasks. Neurophysiological evidence also supports the conclusion that autistic individuals utilize perceptual processes to a greater extent than neurotypical comparisons to support problem solving and reasoning; however, how atypicalities in early perceptual processing influence subsequent cognitive processes remains to be elucidated. The goals of the present study were to test the relationship between early perceptual and subsequent cognitive event related potentials (ERPs) and their relationship to levels of autism traits. 62 neurotypical adults completed the Autism Spectrum Quotient (AQ) and participated in an ERP task. Path models were compared to test predictive relationships among an early perceptual ERP (the P1 component), a subsequent cognitive ERP (the N400 effect), and the Attention to Detail subscale of the AQ. The size of participants' P1 components was positively correlated with the size of their N400 effect and their Attention to Detail score. Model comparisons supported the model specifying that variation in Attention to Detail scores predicted meaningful differences in participants' ERP waveforms. The relationship between Attention to Detail scores and the size of the N400 effect was significantly mediated by the size of the P1 effect. This study revealed that neurotypical adults with higher levels of Attention to Detail show larger P1 differences, which, in turn, correspond to larger N400 effects. Findings support the Enhanced Perceptual Functioning model of autism, suggesting that early perceptual processing differences may cascade forward and result in modifications to later cognitive mechanisms.
34672993|a|The provision of timely, effective, and socially valid non-pharmacological intervention is at the core of efforts to support the development of young autistic children. These efforts are intended to support children to develop skills, empower their caregivers, and lay the foundation for optimal choice, independence, and quality of life into adulthood. But what is the optimal amount of intervention? In this Viewpoint, we review current guidelines and consider evidence from an umbrella review of non-pharmacological interventions for autistic children aged up to 12 years. We show the lack of consensus on the issue, identify factors that might be relevant to consider, and present an evidence-based framework for determining the optimal amount of intervention for each child, along with recommendations for future research.
34672298|a|There are numerous factors that determine the sense of happiness and level of depression in caregivers of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The aim of this paper is to evaluate happiness and depression in/among families with an ASD child and compare with families with neurotypical children. The study included 182 participants. The participants answered questions for two questionnaires: Beck Depression Inventory and Oxford Happiness Questionnaire. The outcome of the study identified significant differences for sense of happiness and level of depression among the parents of children with ASD compared with the parents of neurotypical children. It was shown that parents of children with ASD reported a lower sense of happiness and a higher level of depression compared to the parents of neurotypical children. They also showed a significantly higher level of depression relative to the decreased level of happiness. Moreover, parents who have a university education degree and a child with ASD showed a higher sense of happiness and a lower level of depression than parents who had a secondary education degree, in the studied groups.
34672295|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder, affecting communication and behavior. Historically, ASD had been described as a purely psychiatric disorder with genetic factors playing the most critical role. Recently, a growing body of literature has been emphasizing the importance of environmental and immunological factors in its pathogenesis, with the autoimmune process attracting the most attention. This study provides a review of the autoimmune involvement in the pathogenesis of ASD. The\r\nmicrobiome, the representative of the innate immune system in the central nervous system (CNS), plays a critical role in triggering inflammation. Besides, a bidirectional communicational pathway between the CNS and the intestine called the gut-brain-axis is linked to the development of ASD. Moreover, the higher plasma level of pro-inflammatory cytokines in ASD patients and the higher prevalence of autoimmune disorders in the first-degree family members of affected persons are other clues of the immune system involvement in\r\nthe pathogenesis of ASD. Furthermore, some anti-inflammatory drugs, including resveratrol and palmitoylethanolamide have shown promising effects by relieving the manifestations of ASD. Although considerable advances have been made in elucidating the role of autoimmunity in the ASD pathogenesis, further studies with stronger methodologies are needed to apply the knowledge to the definitive treatment of ASD.
34672229|a|Folic acid, a water-soluble vitamin B nutrient, plays an important role not only in maintaining a healthy pregnancy but also in offspring brain development and function, however, it remains unclear whether maternal folic acid (FA) supplementation associated with the risk of different postnatal neurodevelopmental outcomes. Here, we performed a systematic review and meta-analysis on the impact of maternal FA supplementation on a wide range of postnatal neurodevelopmental outcomes which include intellectual development, risk of autistic traits, ADHD, behavior, language, and psychomotor problems, using studies extracted from the following databases, including MEDLINE, Web of Science, Cochrane Library, Scopus, EMBASE, and PsychInfo. Thirty-two cohort studies and seven case-control studies were included in this meta-analysis. In the present study, we found that prenatal FA supplementation had a positive impact on offspring's neurodevelopmental outcomes, including improved intellectual development and reduced risk of autism traits, ADHD, behavioral, and language problems. We also found that FA over-supplementation was not associated with an improvement in offspring's brain development, and may have a negative impact on offspring's neurodevelopmental outcomes. This study proved the first panoramic review on the relationship of FA supplementation with offspring's neurodevelopment. Further studies focusing on different dosages and periods of FA supplementation are needed.Supplemental data for this article is available online at https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2021.1993781 .
34672116|a|Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) prevalence estimates have varied by region. In this study, ASD prevalence, based on active case finding from multiple sources, was determined at the county and school district levels in the New Jersey metropolitan area. Among children born in 2008, residing in a four-county area and enrolled in public school in 2016, ASD prevalence was estimated to be 36 per 1000, but was significantly higher in one region-54 per 1000 and greater than 70 per 1000, in multiple school districts. Significant variation in ASD prevalence by race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status (SES), and school district size was identified. Highest prevalence was in mid-SES communities, contrary to expectation. Prevalence among Hispanic children was lower than expected, indicating a disparity in identification. Comprehensive surveillance should provide estimates at the county and town levels to appreciate ASD trends, identify disparities in detection or treatment, and explore factors influencing change in prevalence. LAY SUMMARY: We found autism prevalence to be 3.6% in New Jersey overall, but higher in one region (5.4%) and in multiple areas approaching 7.0%. We identified significant variation in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) prevalence by race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status (SES) and school district size. Mapping prevalence in smaller, well-specified, regions may be useful to better understand the true scope of ASD, disparities in ASD detection and the factors impacting ASD prevalence estimation.
34672048|a|Advances in the understanding of developmental brain disorders such as autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are being achieved through human neurogenetics such as, for example, identifying de novo mutations in SYNGAP1 as one relatively common cause of ASD. A recently developed rat line lacking the calcium/lipid binding (C2) and GTPase activation protein (GAP) domain may further help uncover the neurobiological basis of deficits in children with ASD. This study focused on social dominance in the tube test using Syngap+/Delta-GAP (rats heterozygous for the C2/GAP domain deletion) as alterations in social behaviour are a key facet of the human phenotype. Male animals of this line living together formed a stable intra-cage hierarchy, but they were submissive when living with wild-type (WT) cage-mates, thereby modelling the social withdrawal seen in ASD. The study includes a detailed analysis of specific behaviours expressed in social interactions by WT and mutant animals, including the observation that when the Syngap+/Delta-GAP mutants that had been living together had separate dominance encounters with WT animals from other cages, the two higher ranking Syngap+/Delta-GAP rats remained dominant whereas the two lower ranking mutants were still submissive. Although only observed in a small subset of animals, these findings support earlier observations with a rat model of Fragile X, indicating that their experience of winning or losing dominance encounters has a lasting influence on subsequent encounters with others. Our results highlight and model that even with single-gene mutations, dominance phenotypes reflect an interaction between genotypic and environmental factors.
34671600|a|Memory impairments are associated with many brain disorders such as autism, Alzheimer's disease, and depression. Forming memories involves modifications of synaptic transmission and spine morphology. The Rho family small GTPases are key regulators of synaptic plasticity by affecting various downstream molecules to remodel the actin cytoskeleton. In this paper, we will review recent studies on the roles of Rho proteins in the regulation of hippocampal long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD), the most extensively studied forms of synaptic plasticity widely regarded as cellular mechanisms for learning and memory. We will also discuss the involvement of Rho signaling in spine morphology, the structural basis of synaptic plasticity and memory formation. Finally, we will review the association between brain disorders and abnormalities of Rho function. It is expected that studying Rho signaling at the synapse will contribute to the understanding of how memory is formed and disrupted in diseases.
34671485|a|Introduction: Some children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have difficulties with transitions that may lead to problem behaviours. Although the use of technologies with children with ASD is receiving increasing attention, no study has looked at their effect on transitions in activities of daily living. This study aimed to document the feasibility of (1) using two intervention technologies (NAO humanoid robot or wearable haptic device) separately to facilitate transitions in occupational therapy sessions for children with ASD and (2) the method used to document changes. Methods: Using a single case reversal (ABA) design, two children with ASD were randomly assigned to one of the intervention technologies (humanoid robot or haptic bracelet). Each technology was used as an antecedent to stimulate the start of transitions in eight intervention sessions at a private occupational therapy clinic. Data concerning the time required for transitions, child's behaviours during transitions at the clinic and mother's perception of the child's performance in transitions at home were analysed graphically. Results: When using technology, both children's behaviours were appropriate, quick and relatively stable. Also, both mothers reported improved perceptions of their child's performance in transitions. Conclusions: This exploratory study suggests no detrimental effect of using these technologies.
34671237|a|The Dlx homeodomain transcription factors play important roles in the differentiation and migration of GABAergic interneuron precursors. The mouse and human genomes each have six Dlx genes organized into three convergently transcribed bigene clusters (Dlx1/2, Dlx3/4, and Dlx5/6) with cis-regulatory elements (CREs) located in the intergenic region of each cluster. Amongst these, the I56i and I12b enhancers from the Dlx1/2 and Dlx5/6 locus, respectively, are active in the developing forebrain. I56i is also a binding site for GTF2I, a transcription factor whose function is associated with increased sociability and Williams-Beuren syndrome. In determining the regulatory roles of these CREs on forebrain development, we have generated mutant mouse-lines where Dlx forebrain intergenic enhancers have been deleted (I56i(-/-), I12b(-/-)). Loss of Dlx intergenic enhancers impairs expression of Dlx genes as well as some of their downstream targets or associated genes including Gad2 and Evf2. The loss of the I56i enhancer resulted in a transient decrease in GABA+ cells in the developing forebrain. The intergenic enhancer mutants also demonstrate increased sociability and learning deficits in a fear conditioning test. Characterizing mice with mutated Dlx intergenic enhancers will help us to further enhance our understanding of the role of these Dlx genes in forebrain development.
34670768|a|OBJECTIVES: There are numerous reports on the psychological burden of medical workers after the COVID-19 outbreak; however, no study has examined the influence of developmental characteristics on the mental health of medical workers. The objective of this study was to examine whether the developmental characteristics of medical workers are associated with anxiety and depression after the COVID-19 outbreak. DESIGN: We conducted an online cross-sectional questionnaire survey in October 2020. PARTICIPANTS AND SETTING: The data of 640 medical workers were analysed. The questionnaire included items on sociodemographic data, changes in their life after the COVID-19 outbreak and symptoms of depression, anxiety, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) traits and autism spectrum disorder traits. MAIN OUTCOMES: Depression symptoms were assessed by the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 and anxiety symptoms were assessed by the Generalised Anxiety Disorder-7. A series of hierarchical multiple regression analyses were performed to test the effects of developmental characteristics on depression and anxiety symptoms after controlling for sociodemographic factors and changes in participants' lives after the COVID-19 outbreak. RESULTS: Increases in physical and psychological burden were observed in 49.1% and 78.3% of the subjects, respectively. The results of a multiple regression analysis showed that ADHD traits were significantly associated with both depression (beta=0.390, p<0.001) and anxiety (beta=0.426, p<0.001). Autistic traits were significantly associated with depression (beta=0.069, p<0.05) but not anxiety. Increased physical and psychological burden, being female, medical workers other than physicians and nurses, fear of COVID-19 and experience of discrimination were also significantly associated with both depression and anxiety. CONCLUSION: Globally, the burden on medical workers increased. This study suggested that medical workers with higher ADHD traits may need special attention during the COVID-19 pandemic.
34669532|a|This study evaluated the effectiveness of an embedded naturalistic intervention for teaching augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) application responses to three preschool-aged males with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Parents were taught to embed opportunities for their child to communicate with a grid-based AAC application during every-day routines such as play or mealtime. Communication targets included requesting objects using two-step taxonomic navigational responses, and requesting assistance, rejecting items, or making social comments/responses using a two-step message-strip response. During intervention, parents used strategies such as time delay, prompting, reinforcement, and device proximity (faded over time) to encourage target responses. Display formats and intervention targets were selected in consideration of prior dynamic assessment results. Effects of intervention were evaluated using a multiple probe across participants design. For functional navigational AAC item requesting, all three participants showed an immediate increase in responding that maintained at high levels. Functional AAC responding for other communicative purposes also increased, but at a more gradual pace. All three participants showed generalized responding when new items were added to displays, and when display pages with a larger array of folders and vocabulary items were introduced. Generalization to labeling tasks was mixed.
